Working p aper
 Advancing y outh -centred d igital   
 ecosys tems in Africa in a   
 post-Covid-19 world 
Melanie Pinet, Sanyu Phiona and Ariana Youn
March 2 021
Key messages
Covid-19 has had multidimensional impacts on young people’s lives and livelihoods. Digital 
technologies have enabled them to respond to these challenges through youth-led activism and community engagement. However, access, awareness and the quality of skills-building opportunities is unequal. 
Barriers driving the youth digital divide in Africa are multifaceted. Youth are subject to a double 
disadvantage: unequal or inadequate infrastructure and affordability. Poor infrastructure restricts youth access to the internet and affordability limits access to devices and data. These limitations restrict young people’s internet exposure, which they need to acquire basic digital skills. Greater investments and incentives to telecoms and the private sector are needed to provide opportunities for change. 
Digital-enabled interventions and programmes aimed to equip youth with 21st-century skills should 
consider designs grounded in creative and participatory approaches, be tailored to young people’s local contexts, reflect their lived experiences and aspirations, and go beyond short-term outcomes. Special attention should be paid to vulnerable groups including young women, young people with disabilities, youth migrants and LGBT youth and their intersecting vulnerabilities and needs. 
Participatory
Development
Associates Ltd.Readers are encouraged to reproduce material for their own publications, as long as they are 
not being sold commercially. ODI requests due acknowledgement and a copy of the publication. 
For online use, we ask readers to link to the original resource on the ODI website. The views 
presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of 
ODI or our partners.
This work is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.
How to cite: Pinet, M., Sanyu, P. and Youn, A. (2021) Advancing youth-centred digital ecosystems in 
Africa in a post-Covid-19 world. London: ODI [ www.odi.org/publications/ 17947 -advancing-youth-
centred-digital-ecosystems-africa-post-covid- 19-world ]Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Awa Sanou, Albert van der Linden, Isabelle Carboni, Oliver Lough 
and Louise Shaxson for their helpful comments and review. The authors also like to thank all 
participants who took part in the ODI global consultation on youth and digital technologies 
in sub-Saharan Africa on 14 July 2020 as well as PeaceDirect, who hosted the consultation on 
Platform4Dialoague. Finally, the authors thank Aaron Bailey-Athias, Sarah Turner, Katie Forsythe 
and Matthew Foley for coordination, management and editorial support. 
About this paper
This publication is part of the Youth Forward initiative supported by the Mastercard Foundation.Contents
Acknowledgements  / i
Boxes, tables and figures /  iii
1 Introduction  / 1
2 The youth digital divide / 2
2.1 Access and affordability: s etting the scene / 2
2.2 Young women’s access to technology / 5
2.3 Language  / 6
2.4 Disability / 7
2.5 Awareness / 8
3 How Covid-19 has changed technology use by young people in sub-Saharan Africa / 10
3.1 Impact of Covid-19 lockdowns on youth lives and livelihood / 10
3.2 Youth civic participation, activism and technology / 11
3.3 Youth technology use in the (mis- and dis-) information age / 13
3.4 Youth-led digital innovations – the power of challenges / 15
4 Skills needed to navigate a connected, increasingly digital world   / 17
4.1 Digital skills for youth / 18
4.2 Learning and digital skills building  / 20
4.3 Digital-friendly learning approaches / 21
5 Conclusion: what is needed for youth to thrive in digital societies?   / 23
Bibliography  / 26Display items
Boxes
Box 1 | Defining usage and coverage gaps / 3
Box 2 | Digital divides and meaningful connectivity  / 6
Box 3 | Defining mis- and disinformation / 13
Box 4 | Core life skills / 17
Box 5 | Top seven soft skills young people are lacking / 18
Box 6 | Data literacy and media literacy  / 19
Photos
Volunteers at the Lagos Food Bank Initiative carry out community engagement work in Ikotun, 
Lagos, Nigeria, 2020. Photo credit: Oluwafemi Dawodu/Shutterstock / 9
Students use their mobile phone and computer devices in a classroom, Nigeria, 2020. Photo 
credit: Confidence Marshall Nzew/Shutterstock / 16
Young women use masks during meeting at work, Ghana, 2020. Photo credit: Kwame Amo/
Shutterstock / 251 Introduction
Evidence across the globe has shown that the impact of Covid-19 on youth (aged 15–24 years old) 
lives and livelihoods has been profound and multidimensional (UNFPA, 2020b), ranging from 
constrained access to education and employment, adverse effects on mental health and the 
increased spread of misinformation and online polarisation. The use of digital technologies, including 
social media platforms, has accelerated, making a simple smartphone a new tool of empowerment; 
yet, over 70% of Africa’s youth is offline (AU, 2020). Across the African continent, 80% of youth 
(aged 15–35 years) consider Wifi as a fundamental human right (Ichikowitz Family Foundation, 2020). 
While the situation varies across African countries, a large proportion of of young people live in rural 
(IFAD, 2019) and hard-to-reach areas with no access to electricity. Therefore, narratives that praise 
technology as a solution to youth challenges do not hold true for everyone.
The global pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing inequalities, deepened young people’s 
intersecting vulnerabilities, such as for young women (Plan International, 2020a; Mpungose, 
2020), young people with disabilities (Emirie et al., 2020; UNFPA, 2020a), youth migrants and 
LGBT youth (Ghoshal, 2020). New disparities have also emerged, making youth the biggest losers 
of the Covid-19 crisis. This is particularly the case for urban youth, who were highly reliant on 
the informal economy before lockdown measures were imposed (Amdeselassie et al., 2020a; 
Amdeselassie et al., 2020b; Chirisa et al., 2020). Consequently, the pandemic has revealed 
the need to develop resilient and sustainable systems and economies that leverage digital 
technologies as a tool for youth empowerment.
Despite these challenges, youth have been a positive force in their communities, and are leading 
the way in the Covid-19 response (OSAA, 2020; Pinet et al., 2020a). Africa’s current generation 
of youth is characterised by its energy, determination and acquaintance with digital technologies. 
They are better placed to shape their continent’s transformation than generations of African 
youth before them (UNECA, 2014). However, without a conducive environment that includes 
skills building, young people will be unable to take full advantage of the opportunities the digital 
ecosystem has to offer in their region and beyond. Digital technologies have the potential to make 
up for the major development setbacks caused by Covid-19, but programmes, interventions and 
digital development must be youth-inclusive to be both effective and sustainable.
The findings and analysis of this briefing paper are based on insights from an online global 
consultation held on 14 July 2020 on Platform4Dialogue. Over 130 participants contributed to a 
series of online, text -based discussions, exploring young Africans’ use of digital technologies in the 
context of the Covid-19 pandemic. They delved into youth activism and community engagement and 
questioned which digital skills are needed for youth to meaningfully engage in shaping our digital 
societies. Participants were selected via purposive sampling, considering the basis of their experience 
working with youth and digital technologies or by virtue of being young people themselves.2
ODI Working paper 
2 The youth digital divide
 Getting basic internet access is just the first step. To participate in digital society you need an 
affordable quality connection, you need the digital skills to use the internet and you need to feel 
safe online. While Ghana has seen important progress, it is still the case that women here – and 
around the world – face a multitude of barriers preventing them from realising the internet’s full 
benefits (Chenai Chair, Web Foundation research manager for Gender and Digital Rights ).
From a global view, digital skills are outlined as a specific target in the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), and are mentioned explicitly in Indicators 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 of SDG 4 or the education-
focused goal (UNESCO and EQUALS Skills Coalition, 2019). Although SDG target 9c calls for 
a significant increase in access to information and communication technologies (ICT) that is 
universal and affordable in the least developed countries by 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic has 
highlighted digital exclusion and how far behind countries are in reaching this goal. As services 
have increasingly moved online (including public services, business transactions and access to 
information), unequal and inequitable meaningful access and use of digital technologies for 
youth in sub-Saharan Africa has been laid bare (UNECA, 2014). This youth digital divide is further 
accentuated when viewed in terms of skills, gender and language barriers. 
Calls to tackle the digital divide from the international development community are not new but 
have unsurprisingly gained prominence in recent months due to the pandemic. In an online high-
level meeting on digital inclusion, UN Secretary-General António Guterres stated that bridging 
the digital divide ‘could become the greatest equaliser in promoting equality’ and called for links 
and partnerships to be strengthened across sectors ‘to rally investment for the ambitious goal of 
connecting half the world to opportunities’ (United Nations Press Office, 2020). 
Aside from the need for digital skills (explored later in this paper), several other issues were raised 
by consultation participants as challenges or impediments to technology use in the region. Half of 
the policy measures towards digital services (129 in total at the time of writing) are dedicated to 
digital infrastructure (including affordability and network expansion) across sub-Saharan Africa – 
an increase in response to the Covid-19 pandemic (World Bank, 2020). Our findings highlight the 
multidimensional nature of the problem, which we explore below.
2.1 Access and affordability: s etting the scene
Despite developments in digital technologies, their role is for the most part underexploited due 
to access and financial constraints. Although it is possible to use 3D printers to create personal 
protective equipement (PPE), to design data visualisations to share information, and to fundraise 
for campaigns (Kazeem, 2020), such opportunities can rarely be taken advantage of. Some 3
ODI Working paper 
entrepreneurial youth have capitalised on this lack of access to spot business opportunities during 
lockdown, for example using their Wifi router as a paid hotspot for others. The pandemic has 
created new needs and is likely to generate new economic opportunities beyond the health crisis.
Many consultation participants mentioned how access to digital technologies varies across the 
region, and within national contexts. They also noted an unevenness between rural and urban 
areas, including access to internet-enabled devices, computers and data and with varying levels 
of affordability and quality. Participants raised concerns over assumptions and generalisations 
regarding the urban–rural divide, noting that, although access to technologies tends to be 
higher in urban areas, in some countries digital innovation has been observed to be growing in 
the agriculture sector and in rural areas. Marginalised ethnic groups also tend to be less likely to 
have internet access than their fellow citizens due to political bias in internet coverage allocation 
(Weidmann et al., 2016). 
On the whole, unequal access to technology exacerbates existing inequalities. This is particularly 
acute for individuals at a young age such as children and youth. School closures due to the 
pandemic impacted over 1.29 billion students (74% of the world’s student population) including 
297 million students across the African continent, making them even more vulnerable. UNICEF 
has calculated that approximately 500 million learners globally did not have access to any 
remote learning. Research found that, when schools were closed in low-income countries due to 
lockdowns, only 25% were providing remote learning opportunities (Tawil, 2020; International 
Finance Corporation, 2020).1 Such issues must be addressed at scale in order to bridge coverage 
and usage gaps (see Box 1). 
Box 1 Defining usage and coverage gaps
Usage gap : those who live within the footprint of a mobile broadband network but are not 
using mobile internet.
Coverage gap : those who do not live within the footprint of a mobile broadband network.
There are still 3.4 billion people who live in an area covered by a mobile broadband 
network but who are not using the mobile internet – the usage gap. In fact, the usage 
gap is now 6 times larger than the coverage gap (GSMA, 2020d: 5).
Source: GSMA
1 See also https://gigaconnect.org/4
ODI Working paper 
Although inadequate digital infrastructure was observed as a hindrance to digital inclusion, the issue 
of affordability was also prevalent, with several participants mentioning the high costs of internet 
and data bundles, which affect those in lower income brackets. Data costs vary enormously across 
the region with 1GB costing up to $27 in Benin and Malawi, but less than $1.5 in Kenya, Egypt, Zambia 
and Tunisia (Ang, 2020). While investments in digital infrastructure are urgently needed to help 
lower costs, other routes can also be explored such as lowering internet taxes (Stork et al., 2020), 
seeking alternative business models for data subsidies, and innovations in low tech data access not 
necessarily requiring investment in expensive phone masts and base stations. 
During the pandemic, participants observed how mobile network companies across the region 
engaged with governments to lower or eliminate mobile money transaction fees and data fees 
on sites of public importance (e.g., for health or education). This proved important in creating an 
environment that increased market competition for telecoms to lower the price of data and offer 
different packages (other than daily, weekly or monthly).
During the early stages of the pandemic, almost all the telcos in Ghana implemented some 
cheaper internet charges to help the citizens. The mobile money transactions were done freely 
without charges ( Abdulmanal Setor Tekpor, IT technician, Ghana).
Also some telecommunication providers [in Nigeria] increased their data volume to enable 
people to have access to the internet for instance a data plan of 1.2GB for a thousand naira was 
increase to 1.5GB for the same price ( Solomon Tijani, Librarian, Nigerian Institute of Social and 
Economic Research, Nigeria).
In South Africa, state-owned tertiary institutions are facilitating at least 30GB of data for every 
student during the pandemic. However, this does not guarantee that every student has a gadget 
to access that data and use it productively to catch up on their modules (Muneinazvo Kujeke, 
Research Officer, Institute for Security Studies, South Africa).
One participant noted how Nigerian youth actively took part in campaigning efforts to lower prices:
Recently, in Nigeria, and most likely as a spillover of this pandemic, young people led the charge 
with demanding that the Nigerian government regulate the price of internet data (Consultation 
participant, founder of a youth-focused organisation, Uganda).
However, this alone did not solve the issue of access to devices that people need to use the 
internet. In some instances, participants gave examples of governments and organisations 
providing technologies directly to people as well as highlighting the importance of low costs and 
free internet as ways to boost digital inclusion.
Maybe some governments should explore a way to launch huge programmes of distribution 
of smartphone to the most vulnerable youth people. In Cameroon for example, since the 5
ODI Working paper 
year 2019, the Cameroonian Head of State has launched a special programme in the higher 
Education level of ‘one student, one computer’. All the students in universities and institutions 
of higher education were granted a computer ( Jean Emile Nobola, PhD candidate in Public 
Administration Political Science, Ankara Hacı Bayram Veli University, Turkey).
There are pros and cons to device distribution. Existing evidence in refugee contexts discourages 
free distribution of low-quality handsets, which can lead to market distortions and further 
accentuate access gaps (GSMA, 2020c). The technical challenges faced by the One Laptop Per 
Child (OLPC) programme in Rwanda is another example of the difficulties surrounding distribution. 
However, other government-led initiatives such as Kenya’s Digital Literacy Project and the small 
classroom programme (Government of Rwanda, n.d.) have emerged to improve youth digital literacy 
and access to digital equipment in the classroom.
Government or private organisations can provide either PC or Android for parents either free or 
on a ‘no-interest’ ground. Government could also partner with relevant network providers for 
some hours of free internet access per day ( Victor Uduah, secondary school teacher, Nigeria).
Emerging services such as M-Kopa’s innovative pay-as-you-go and rent-to-own financing models 
for phone handsets ease mobile phone access by allowing users to pay in instalments while using 
the device. 
2.2 Young women’s access to technology
Women tend to have lower ICT skills and be disproportionately targeted by internet crimes 
or online gender-based violence (GBV), hence the need for particular attention on digital 
competences for women to ensure safety both on- and offline (UNESCO and EQUALS Skills 
Coalition, 2019; Bester et al., 2020). Globally, men are 21% more likely to have access to the 
internet than women, with the gap increasing to 52% in the least developed economies (World 
Wide Web Foundation, 2020). Even as women are gaining more access to the internet, they face 
additional barriers preventing them from fully participating, including social norms and family 
approval (ibid.). Female technology users are more likely to have to borrow devices from male 
household members, who often control and monitor their use (GSMA, 2015).
A majority of primary and secondary schools in rural Africa, for example, do not have 
connectivity or ICT equipment, and travelling outside of the community to find a location to 
connect to a network is expensive for most youth and in many cases, not possible or safe for 
girls and young women ( Consultation participant, local government ICT director, Kenya).
New research on women’s digital rights draws out some recommendations to close the gender 
digital divide (World Wide Web Foundation, 2020). These include: 
• encourage the tech sector to collect and publish the gender gap rate; 6
ODI Working paper 
• shift from the concept of ‘basic internet access’ to ‘meaningful connectivity’ (see Box 2) and 
adopt it as a target for internet use to tackle the gender gap; 
• promote digital skills and ICT education for women and girls;
• support women’s participation in technology design and development, as well as local content 
creation and ICT innovation; and 
• safeguard the online privacy of women and girls (ibid.).
These concepts align closely with existing literature classifying ‘first-order’ and ‘second-order’ 
digital divides (see Box 2).
Box 2 Digital divides and meaningful connectivity 
‘First-order’ digital divides  focus on access.
‘Second-order’ digital divides  focus on meaningful use. 
The Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) defines ‘meaningful connectivity’ as being able to use 
the internet every day through an appropriate device with enough data and a fast connection. 
Sources: van Deursen and van Dijk (2019) and A4AI (n.d.)
In terms of content creation, some organisations affirm that ensuring more content that is 
female-led could help to avoid it being gender-biased (UNESCO and EQUALS Skills Coalition, 
2019). Training aimed at women human rights defenders, such as that led by Safe Sister in East 
Africa, which tries to improve online security and reduce online GBV, represent examples of good 
practice for digitally active young women and encourages those who are offline for privacy and 
security reasons to be connected. 
2.3 Language 
Language constitutes a barrier for digital inclusion and innovation; many digital technologies 
are produced for a Western audience, with English as the default language (UNECA, 2014). 
Participants in the consultation noted the lack of technology programmes catering to local 
contexts and languages, with one participant mentioning the need for more collaboration 
between technology developers and local linguists: 
I strongly advocate for the technology programme writers to work with local linguists so that 
the technologies can be translated into local languages and expand the talent across many 
communities who are not able to read or write in English ( Daniel Njoroge Karanja, researcher, 
lecturer and mediator in international conflict resolution, St Mary’s University, US).7
ODI Working paper 
It is therefore important to embed local languages in educational systems and curricula and 
include local linguistics from the outset to co-create technology solutions that are tailored to 
specific local contexts. 
Beyond local linguistics, co-creation and localisation must be embedded at all stages of the 
innovation cycle, from design to outreach and marketing, as demonstrated by Localization 
Lab.2 This is echoed by calls from multilateral agencies and organisations who advocate for 
the provision of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education in local 
languages to better utilise local and tacit knowledge, in addition to improving English language 
skills among African youth (UNECA, 2014). 
Finally, the quest for youth-centred digital ecosystems in Africa must embed language, principles 
and ideals that challenge current harmful narratives about and within the African continent 
that largely draw from colonial regimes (Curran, 2020). Internationally driven initiatives must 
move away from the white saviour complex and acknowledge the systemic racial inequality and 
exclusion driving development and technological interventions. Young people in the African 
continent are well placed to share their aspirations and ideas of how to do this when given a seat 
at the decision-making table (AU, 2020; We Robotics, 2021).
2.4 Disability
There are concerns around accessibility and the digital inclusion of people with disabilities. People 
with disabilities globally tend to have much lower levels of mobile and smartphone ownership, 
and are less aware of mobile internet or perceive it as less beneficial compared with non-disabled 
persons. This is primarily due to literacy and digital skills, affordability and perceived relevance 
barriers (GSMA, 2020e). However, people with disabilities who own mobiles can have comparable 
and sometimes even better usage of mobile internet (ibid.). Consequently, creators of digital 
technologies should consider disabilities that affect users’ capacity to meaningfully utilise them, 
such as visual or hearing impairments. Visually impaired persons from indigenous communities 
want to explore new technologies, but if they remain unavailable in their own languages and are 
not accessible to them this could become another aspect of their lives ‘where they are forced to 
assimilate to the cultural and linguistic context of the majority population’ (Minority Rights Group 
International, 2020). Co-creating technologies by using assistive technology (AT) with persons 
with disabilities could further their inclusion in society while also widening tech companies’ 
customer base. Initiatives such as the youth-serving Resilient Urban Mobility Hackathon held in 
Sierra Leone focusing on vulnerable groups in the transport sector (Arroyo Arroyo et al., 2019) or 
Ghanaian tech company Tech Era offer some examples of impact involving youth as well as young 
persons with disability in the design of AT. 
2 See www.localizationlab.org/scroll-down8
ODI Working paper 
2.5 Awareness
An issue raised in the consultation was that of exposure to digital technologies as well as an 
understanding or awareness of their potential benefits. These issues are often overlooked as 
concerns and efforts concentrate on supply (e.g. improving infrastructure, providing equipment, 
ensuring affordability), but to boost demand it is important to consider barriers beyond cost. One 
study on the gender digital divide, for example, noted that ‘lack of understanding, interest or time 
was more commonly cited than affordability or availability as the reason for not using the internet’ 
(UNESCO and EQUALS Skills Coalition, 2019). An individuals’ interest and perception of need are 
both linked to the skills they have – people with little experience of using digital technologies tend 
to underestimate their benefits and utility (ibid.). However, personality traits and aspirations will 
ultimately influence young people’s use of digital technologies.
Not everyone understands what technology can do for them. Not many people will understand 
the kinds of information that can be accessed or delivered through a mobile phone or over the 
internet, or how this information can be used to improve lives and livelihoods ( Consultation 
participant, local government ICT Director, Kenya).
For some it may not be a question of exposure; their low interest or resistance to using ICTs 
can be related to personal or cultural beliefs. Some communities or individuals may consider, 
for instance, the internet as a tool that could potentially negatively impact them. Inclusion 
programmes that work with individuals or communities holding such beliefs should carefully 
design implementation strategies and prioritise community-led designs, while being aware of what 
their funding and their organisation represent to those they seek to serve. 
Is it anything to do with any cultural beliefs (e.g., some rural communities think internet can be 
seen as evil or a way to negatively impact the community so they may forbid it). Once there is a 
understanding and it is agreed that is the best way for the youth (not just a Westerner deciding 
this is best but the community want it as well) then educate them and empower them to use 
it and provision to teach other people in the community ( Sarah Boateng, Founder, Investing in 
Girls Education in Africa (IGEA Enterprise), Ghana).
Technology itself can facilitate the communication of opportunities and ideas that could benefit 
communities, for example by raising awareness about how information can realistically improve 
lives and livelihoods, particularly for youth. There is a role for young people who already use ICTs 
to advance digital inclusion in their communities. Their skills and motivation could be further 
exploited by local governments and civil society organisations (CSOs), for example in delivering 
informal training and sharing their knowledge with their community about how to use technology 
for productive activities. Such actions are welcome, especially in response to youth economic 
hardship and limited job opportunities during the pandemic, but they could potentially be 
sustained if done continuously and systematically.9
ODI Working paper 
Community youth who can apply the use of this technology should offer community service by 
teaching members of their community how to use technology to enhance their living especially 
during and after this Covid-19 pandemic ( Victor Uduah, secondary school teacher, Nigeria).
Volunteers at the Lagos Food Bank Initiative carry out community engagement work in Ikotun, Lagos, Nigeria, 
2020. Photo credit: Oluwafemi Dawodu/Shutterstock
10
ODI Working paper 
3 How Covid-19 has changed 
technology use by young people in 
sub-Saharan Africa
3.1 Impact of Covid-19 lockdowns on youth lives and livelihood
While youth have been disproportionately affected by the above-mentioned effects of Covid-19, 
segments of youth including young women, younger youth and youth living in lower-income 
countries remain most vulnerable (ILO, 2020). Youth and women, who are more likely to be in 
less skilled or secure jobs in sectors most impacted by the pandemic, were the first to be hit by 
unemployment and wage losses (ILO, 2020). These effects have been felt especially by groups 
such as youth refugees, who rely on humanitarian and development programmes as well as 
community-based businesses and activities including savings and loans groups, have also seen 
increasing vulnerability:
I can say in particular lives of both poor and refugees are more affected since majority depend 
on daily struggle to survive for basic needs. Youth and women programmes which used to help 
them were suspended due to the pandemic and there were restrictions. E.g. women circles 
for savings and loans were no longer progressing due to restrictions and lack of financial and 
participation in the groups, business and small-scale initiatives collapsed as a result of the 
pandemic ( Anonymous consultation participant). 
Social distancing measures have disrupted existing social practices and considerably altered 
the social fabric of African youths’ communities. The toll on young people’s mental health 
in sub-Saharan Africa has been underestimated. Current funding that has been shifted to 
the Covid-19 response will undoubtedly result in gaps that are further accentuated after the 
pandemic, especially around mental health and youth capacity to respond to shocks (UN, 2020a). 
Psychosocial services need to be strengthened now and continued after the pandemic (Semo 
and Frissa, 2020). Digital technologies have already allowed youth to respond to some immediate 
needs such as gathering health information, keeping in touch with their support networks and 
accessing mental health information and support. However, internet-based technologies could 
be further leveraged by young entrepreneurs to complement governments’ (see for example 
Department of Social Development, n.d.) and development actors’ support lines to promptly 
respond to these demands at scale and in a cost-effective way.
The mental health problems that’s been generated by Covid is worrisome. I believe that 
there’s opportunity to expand access to care by leveraging web-based and social media 11
ODI Working paper 
technologies to scale up access. Youths hold the key here, all that’s required is support to youth 
entrepreneurship to design user-friendly software/apps that’s sustainable to reach millions ( Dr 
Rashid Raji, Administrator, Citizen Wellness & Advocacy Foundation, US). 
The Covid-19 pandemic has also triggered youth into adopting new learning and economic 
models that have shifted from analogue to digital, with mobile phones as the ‘centre of gravity’. 
Examples of how young people have used mobile phones for productive activities include building 
a customer database to carry out financial transactions, organising the transportation of products 
and accessing markets. 
In all walks of life young people have mobilised and played a critical role in the Covid-19 response; 
the health sector has become the largest employer of youth globally (Compact for Young People 
in Humanitarian Action, 2020). The pandemic has also given rise to a significant growth of youth-
led community engagement and activism that often blends online and offline approaches. Online 
activism in particular has increased as a result of social distancing measures. These developments 
have accelerated the need for youth to acquire the relevant skills and knowledge to fully 
participate in their societies and to be able to protect themselves from dis- and misinformation, as 
well as other online risks such as cybersecurity or online GBV. 
3.2 Youth civic participation, activism and technology
Technology use for the common good is a growing field globally. Innovations in civic technology 
are facilitating greater citizen-government engagement and accountability mechanisms, including 
through SMS-enabled chatbots and inclusive online platforms, cross-regional fact-checking 
initiatives, journalism labs and community reporting tools for informal settlements (Civic Tech 
Innovation Network, 2020). Africa has a long history of youth activism, for example in liberation 
movements in the 1960s and 1970s, and youth activism and campaigning are not new (Bosch, 
2016). However, during the pandemic this is taking new forms and using different platforms. 
African youth predominantly use social media platforms such as WhatsApp (Hassan and Hitchen, 
2020), Facebook, YouTube (Ntarangwi, 2020), Twitter (Obia, 2020), Instagram and TikTok 
(Campanella, 2020), as well as tools designed for low-end phone and limited bandwidth,3 
 to connect, organise and influence. These trends can also be observed in refugee contexts before 
Covid-19. When individuals’ social ties are heavily fragmented as a result of displacement, social 
media helps foster civil society.
New models of collaboration between youth, international non-governmental organisations 
(INGOs) and social media platforms are emerging (Plan International, 2020b). Social media gives 
youth the power to raise awareness about their community priorities, meaning that, as new 
citizen reporters, they can be key in connecting their community with national and international 
institutions. They can also advocate for crystallising a longed-for inclusive knowledge exchange in 
3 See www.grassroot.org.za12
ODI Working paper 
remote areas (Compact for Young People in Humanitarian Action, 2020). In doing so, youth are 
progressively institutionalising collaborative decision-making and facilitating their communities’ 
integration into institutions through intergenerational co-leadership by demonstrating the need 
for their inclusion and active engagement in public services and governance processes (African 
Leadership Institute and African Union’s Office of the Youth Envoy, 2020). 
Young people have also used intergenerational digital storytelling to build trust and shift 
narratives between youth and older generations by spreading messages and photos on social 
media channels. Such blended approaches to storytelling have the potential to reach out to those 
less connected through digital technology. For instance, a consultation participant shared the 
example of a radio drama series developed in partnership between Tshepo 1 Million and Harambee 
on how to remain safe and supported during Covid-19. It was then translated into a comic book 
and shared on Facebook to accommodate for WhatsApp sharing by youth in South Africa.
Youth in turn serves as peace ambassadors who are to organise intergenerational story telling 
(IGST) in their communities, where older members of the communities are invited to share 
stories of how things were and used to be in the past, to change narratives and build trust 
among young people, these ambassadors have been organising the IGST and sharing photos 
on social media, preaching the message of peace on their social media platform ( Alicho Ogbu, 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, Youth Initiative Against Violence and Human Rights Abuse 
(YIAVHA), Nigeria).
By applying a combination of online and offline approaches, youth-focused interventions can 
maximise their reach. Youth outside the community of intervention can be inspired to adopt 
similar approaches and change their perceptions of and attitudes to technology. The geographical 
reach of technology and its ability to connect youth beyond borders can snowball ideas and 
concepts beyond its initial audience.
Structural barriers to community engagement with digital technologies do remain, however, and 
can be accentuated by the urban/rural divide. However, there are also divides within urban centres 
and between youth activists themselves depending on whether they operate from informal 
settlements or other challenging environments. There are additional issues for refugees and 
marginalised populations with regards to technology use for identification, such as biometric or 
SIM card registration, which risk further excluding already vulnerable populations (Madianou, 
2019). Using technology to break the ‘continental divide’ and facilitate exchanges between youth, 
particularly through youth-led movements, could increase cross-border youth collaboration 
towards inclusive growth and civic affairs.
Youth activists in urban areas do not connect enough with youth activists in rural areas and 
refugee camps. There is this tendency for us to stay in our micro communities or issue areas. 13
ODI Working paper 
Going forward youth activists and movements need to cross these borders and collaborate 
and stand in solidarity with each other more ( Syeda Re’em Hussain, Leadership Lead, Afresist 
Platform, Kenya).
3.3 Youth technology use in the (mis- and dis-) information age
The Covid-19 crisis has emphasised the need for reliable and timely information (see Box 3). 
Television, WhatsApp groups and Facebook were all more popular with youth seeking Covid-
related information than official websites and health bodies (AU, 2020; AU Youth Envoy, 2020). 
Many organisations have adapted their communication channels and strategy in response to 
youth engagement and access to technology platforms. 
Box 3 Defining mis- and disinformation
Misinformation is false and often harmful information, which is not shared with malicious 
intent. Disinformation is false and malicious information, which is shared deliberately to 
cause harm.
Source: Tanner (2020: 3)
At first, we used Zoom and streamed live sessions on our Facebook pages. We discovered that 
we were not getting as much engagement from our target audiences – out of school youth – 
as anticipated, and those looking to join the workforce. We continued with the sessions but 
instead put more effort towards transcribing them into blogs on our website and on medium 
that we shared on various platforms, and audio recordings that we distributed widely on 
WhatsApp platforms within our networks ( Consultation participant, practitioner, Uganda).
We have also found that if we post a picture on Facebook we also write out the content in the 
post description so that those who can’t download the pictures can still engage with what is 
shared (Dr Rashid Raji, Administrator, Citizen Wellness & Advocacy Foundation, US).
At the same time, social media also created a barrier to many young people accessing accurate 
and timely information, through misinformation and rumours, sometimes communicated by 
representatives in charge of managing the crisis (ibid.). 
Young Africans have taken advantage of creating WhatsApp groups. These, to some extent 
help spread news, though sometimes fake news too. It is a cheaper and more accessible way. 
However, these groups are essential to update young people on the crisis and developing 
trends to stay safe ( Muneinazvo Kujeke, Research Officer, Institute for Security Studies, 
South Africa).14
ODI Working paper 
Prior to the pandemic, misinformation in African countries had been shaped by extreme speech 
resulting in violence or the spread of ‘racist misogynous, xenophobic messages’. These online 
violent communications often use messaging platforms including Whatsapp, and appear to be 
correlated with lower levels of trust in social and national media (Wasserman and Madrid-Morales, 
2019). The fact-checking,  crowd-sourcing organisation Africa Check offers guidance on how to spot 
misinformation. A consultation participant shared how valuable Africa Check’s system is after having 
used their resources as part of their work with youth: 
They [Africa Check] have a WhatsApp line which people can submit articles or news pieces to, 
which they use as a way of gathering what is floating around the world of social media. They then 
investigate these articles and release a weekly bulletin covering answers to the week’s most popular 
submissions on this WhatsApp line ( Fuaad Coovadia, Pathway and Networks Manager, Harambee 
Youth Employment Accelerator, South Africa).
However, efforts to counter misinformation are limited by the scale of the issue, and the role and 
responsibility of social media platforms is being called into question:
These platforms must actively work to make sure misinformation is removed or challenged as soon 
as it starts to go viral, for example Twitter recently added a fact checking notification to some of 
Trump’s tweets and allowed users to read the actual guidelines regarding postal voting ( Denis Kirya, 
Kantar Market Research Group, UK).
While this is not unique to the African continent or to youth, African youth have a role to play in the 
lifecycle of disinformation from its production to its transmission, reception and reproduction. Young 
people’s visual culture represents an entry point to meaningfully participate in addressing those 
challenges.  
In such context, digital citizenship skills or the understanding of ‘values and norms around responsible 
and appropriate use of digital technologies’ (Cortesi et al., 2020) are increasingly important for 
youth to navigate the world in which they live. Being able to verify a source, a piece of information 
or an organisation is becoming necessary for youth to not only be safeguarded against cybercrimes 
and internet fraud, but also to meaningfully participate in the digital economy and social life of their 
country. 
A lot more training is required to equip DT [digital technologies] users to be alert to such fraud and 
avoid consuming them as gospel truths ( Consultation participant, researcher, Uganda).  
For youth to be equipped with the appropriate digital citizenship skills and to engage in the digital space 
safely and actively, policies facilitating youth digital engagement in both creative and participatory 
ways must be tailored to young people’s own local contexts and reflect their lived experiences and 
aspirations (Cortesi et al., 2020). Ultimately, social media reflects the environments in which it is 
embedded. Hence, information, media ecosystems and sociopolitical contexts greatly affect the type 15
ODI Working paper 
of solutions needed and must go hand in hand with digital literacy efforts. Applying a multi-stakeholder 
peacebuilding lens to address the ‘weaponization of social media’ (Mercy Corps, 2019) and monitoring 
the role social media plays in the wider information ecosystem (Fondation Hirondelle, 2019) can inform 
some of the strategies to address the roots and address the effects of mis- and disinformation.
3.4 Youth-led digital innovations – the power of challenges
During the pandemic, challenges (UNICEF, 2020b), competitions, hackathons and ideation 
campaigns enabled digitally savvy youth to contribute to creating innovative solutions. These 
events usually took place online via bespoke platforms (challenge platforms) and were promoted 
through social media (Joseph, 2020). Examples of this reported by consultation participants 
include a virtual hackathon led by the government of Nigeria to find innovative technology 
solutions during the pandemic and the Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator Lockdown 
challenge,4 an automated service accessible via SMS, Whatsapp and Facebook that allowed young 
people to commit to one way to be Safe, be Smart or be Kind on a daily basis during lockdown. 
Such challenges can easily attract youth attention and go viral if they are well designed, resonate 
with youth and are communicated via the appropriate channels as illustrated by the Lockdown 
challenge, which had reach outside its targeted users: 
If a young person agreed to commit, they would be sent a relevant collectable badge. They 
could also forward the challenge to their friends to be agents of change in their community. The 
service is very viral with 17% of users being from outside of our core network – so we assume 
they learned about the service from their friends ( Amantle Mokubung, Campaign Manager, 
Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator, South Africa).
In Nigeria, the government, through NCC [Nigerian Communications Commission], has 
organised a virtual hackathon to engage the youth in coming up with technology solutions 
to aid in containing the pandemic and reaching out to a wider community ( Solomon Tijani, 
Librarian, Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research, Nigeria).
Governments and international organisations have expanded these efforts in East Africa with the 
recent launch of GeoHub, a regional innovation centre for African youths (Business Daily, 2020) as 
well as Kenya’s Ajira Digital Programme,5 UNICEF’s Generation Unlimited Youth Challenge 
(UNICEF, 2019) and the social innovators’ youth-led movement of the Digital Opportunity Trust 
(DOT).6 Such youth-targeted initiatives could play a role beyond the pandemic to help respond to 
4 www.facebook.com/harambee.youthemployment/photos/take-the-lockdownchallenge-today-every-day-
we-want-to-help-you-commit-to-one-thi/ 2890925954348585 /
5 https://ajiradigital.go.ke/home
6 www.dotrust.org16
ODI Working paper 
the education and employment challenges of the African continent, but must be accompanied by 
structural changes to address systemic inequalities, including between young women and men, 
and the mismatch between the supply and demand sides of employment.
Students use their mobile phone and computer devices in a classroom, Nigeria, 2020. Photo credit: 
Confidence Marshall Nzew/Shutterstock
17
ODI Working paper 
4 Skills needed to navigate a 
connected, increasingly digital world  
As the world’s connectivity and digitalisation continue to intensify, so do the demands of work and 
life. Covid-19 has accelerated the need to reskill the global workforce. Youth are often perceived 
as ‘digital natives’ and are assumed to inherently possess the skills required to participate in and 
progress their digital societies and economies. As well as not having access to basic devices and 
data, the digital divide also extends into skills – many youths across Africa do not have access to 
the training for key skills (see Box 4) that they need to be prepared for life and work in a digital 
world. Certain subsets of digital skills involve advanced technical acumen, but there remains a 
steep challenge regarding the fundamental digital skills that are essential for all young people’s 
preparedness and navigation through a widely digital-dependent social and economic life. For 
instance, a qualitative study and test, led by Cenfri, that assessed youth digital skills in an informal 
settlement in Nairobi found that the vast majority of young people did not have the sufficient 
digital skills in order to access entry-level economic opportunities in the digital economy with test 
results averaging 55%, a mark far from the 80% normative framework benchmark (van den Berg 
and Johnston, 2019).
Box 4 Core life skills
Examples of core life skills include personal hygiene management, menstrual hygiene 
management, knowledge on sexual reproductive health, legal and citizenship rights, and 
understanding of notions of gender and social norms and financial literacy.
Source: Pinet et al. (2020b)
While necessary specific knowledge and skillsets largely depend on the needs of industries, 
often foremost missing are key life skills, soft skills and 21st-century skills. However, young 
people are speaking up7 about this lack of support. Training in key digital skills is consistently 
7 During African Union’s Africa Youth Month, November 2020, ODI launched a social media campaign 
through the Youth Forward initiative. Young leaders, some of whom took part in the July consultation, 
were asked ‘what type of skills will be most important for youth to access jobs or improve their 
businesses in the coming decade?’. The campaign featured: Deborah Saki, Founder of Oniocha Books 
and a Member of WEF’s Global Shapers Community in Ghana; Joseph Ngochi, Founder and Director of 
Boys Africa Foundation in Kenya; Maman Daouda Boukary, President of the Youth Council of the Conseil 
de l’Entente in Niger; Nandini Tanya Lallmon, lawyer and entrepreneur, Global Peace Chain in Mauritius; 
Sarah Boateng, Founder of Investing in Girls Education in Africa (IGEA Enterprise) in Ghana; and Vicky 
Aridi, Youth Focal Point of UN Joint-SDG Fund and Co-founder of the Policy Act Initiative in Kenya.18
ODI Working paper 
overlooked and underinvested in, despite being critical for youth in their pursuits to thrive in 
life, work, entrepreneurship, community development and social activism (Pinet et al., 2020b). 
Furthermore, it is important that these skills are grounded in a broader skills-building framework, 
to enable young people to seize opportunities in the digital ecosystem. Harnessing these crucial 
skills enables youth to enact their individual principal rights and soft skills – such as confidence, 
communication, leadership, advocacy and storytelling – enabling them to tackle social issues in 
their communities.
Beyond the need for youth to cultivate core life skills for their own empowerment, employers 
comment that soft skills are often missing in today’s graduates (see Box 5).
Box 5 Top seven soft skills young people are lacking
The African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS) lists the top seven soft skills which 
business leaders note are missing from young people: (1) initiative (2) problem-solving (3) self-
awareness (4) collaboration (5) confidence (6) professionalism (7) conversational proficiency 
(AIMS). As can be understood, such key life and soft skills are paramount for young people to 
harness, regardless of the specific they pursue. 
Source: consultation participant Charles Kimpolo, Director at AIMS, Rwanda
Other approaches categorise key skills for youth into four sets: behavioural skills (e.g. 
communication, creativity, leadership), analytical skills (e.g. writing, numeracy, critical thinking), 
technical skills (e.g. financial, accounting, STEM subjects) and digital skills (Sharma, 2020). 
4.1 Digital skills for youth
Digital skills can fall into several categories including productive digital skills, e-leadership digital 
skills, consumer digital skills and developer digital skills (Bester et al., 2020). At the most central 
level, productive digital skills enable individuals to create content such as basic documents, 
presentations or spreadsheets; sell items online; and find work through online platforms, while 
e-leadership skills enable them to utilise digital technologies to conceive and implement business 
models and deliver goods. These skills facilitate income opportunities in digital economies, 
without having to acquire more technical or advanced digital acumen. Other frameworks such 
as the ‘Skills for a Digital Age’ not only outline the skills needed for the future of work but also 
innovative ways to deliver this training (Caribou Digital, n.d.).  
Consumer digital skills are described within Cenfri’s classification as the ability to browse and 
consume digital media, complete and submit online forms and make purchases or exchanges 
digitally (Bester et al., 2020). By applying critical thinking to media literacy (see Box 6) and 19
ODI Working paper 
understanding digital identity, young people can better identify misinformation and address 
fraud as online consumers, as they increasingly interact with businesses and government services 
online. Furthermore, media literacy skills can empower youth to express themselves and to raise 
awareness around social issues that concern them and their communities (Rost et al., 2020). 
Box 6 Data literacy and media literacy 
‘Data literacy’, the ability to understand and interpret data such as statistics, is also essential 
in the digital ecosystem, with one consultation participant describing it as not necessarily just 
‘being able to collect and analyse data, but rather understanding what kind of data a user is 
capable of generating, the value you get from having it, and the value that could be gained 
from combining with other data sources’. The same participant shared that for a young 
person trying to upskill, data literacy ‘can be demonstrated by a side project or case study 
that proves they’re able to work with some raw data, can summarise it and draw meaningful 
insights from it on their own’. Data literacy and data fluency can also help individuals to make 
sense of data in the media and avoid misleading statistics. Another consultation participant 
described an understanding of statistics as ‘useful for knowing the ways in which data can 
be misleading’ (survivorship bias, skewness, etc.) and how to prevent yourself from making 
erroneous data-based decisions. 
Media literacy refers to one’s ability to consume and critically evaluate media content through 
different types of communication channels including newspapers, magazines, TV, radio, mail, 
telephone and the internet, and understanding the messages sent.
Source: authors
Youth often lack an understanding of how to most effectively manage and consume their mobile 
data, particularly when it comes to business-related activities. This can impact their ability 
to develop their customer base by accessing important information in real time. With both 
enhanced, equitable access to data and quality learning, more workers could optimise their usage 
of data and maximise opportunities from digital platforms.
We found some platform workers turn off their data to conserve data and battery, and in doing 
so miss out on jobs. For a lot of these workers internet packages were going unused because 
their expiry dates were reached before all the data had been consumed. When we speak about 
digital skills, even this basic understanding of how to manage and use data bundles can be an issue 
(Annabel Schiff, consultant, Caribou Digital).
Finally, in this typology, developer digital skills are referred to as technical skills in data science, 
artificial intelligence or the creation of apps, programmes, cyber security systems and networks 20
ODI Working paper 
(Bester et al., 2020). Just as for other specialised industries, acquiring such a set of digital skills 
requires technical training. However, educational frameworks such as @iLabAfrica (University of 
Strathmore in Nairobi) can help bridge the gap between employers and the education system by 
encouraging partnerships and boosting youth preparedness. 
Despite increasing attempts from practitioners and education specialists to categorise and 
promote 21st century skills including digital skills (van Laar et al., 2020), a large number of youth 
leave education without acquiring those or being assessed against them. Research on 21st century 
skills assessment in nine sub-Saharan African countries highlights the absence of assessment tools 
deliberately capturing those skills (Kim and Care, 2020). However, it also shows the potential for 
those tools to be tweaked to adapt to these new skills.
The classifications differed and some are bundled so you could not tell what could be counted 
for ‘digital skills’, plus much of the upskilling seems to be done privately (either online for those 
who can do that, or in private coding academies, etc.). It is hard to get a clear picture on the 
completion of skills training ( Isabelle Carboni, former Digital World Lead, Cenfri).
4.2 Learning and digital skills-building 
Across different countries and community contexts, concepts such as digital citizenship, digital 
literacy and new media literacy are being used to group skills that youth need to make better 
use of digital technologies, as well as to organise them under educational programmes that 
can be implemented in formal, informal and connected learning environments (Cortesi et al., 
2020). Community learning is one way to potentially engage youth in passing on their skills, while 
also providing jobs. As one consultation participant recommended: ‘government should use IT 
graduates or IT students or people [who] have knowledge, on how to use the digital platforms to 
teach others since there are so many graduates with no jobs’. 
Youth need to be prepared to respond to the dynamic demands of employers in their context 
while on the job; this would reduce the portion of work outsourced to other countries due to 
skills shortages. For example, the potential to retain and grow South Africa’s share of digital and 
ICT services should not be underestimated (Harambee, 2020). 
Political will and commitment to investments in making tools available for youth to be equipped 
with digital skills from primary through to secondary learning is critical. One suggested approach 
is to make technology classes mandatory at the secondary education level, to avoid the 
‘secondary school trap’ that causes many girls to lose their interest in digital skills (UNESCO and 
EQUALS Skills Coalition, 2020). Integrating digital skills learning throughout secondary education 
would also require consistent and quality training of teachers. One consultation participant 
referenced the ‘non-adaptive curriculum’, wherein many academic institutions do not have the 
mechanisms or flexibility in place to regularly review their curricula and align their preparation of 21
ODI Working paper 
youth to employers’ needs. More adaptive curricula grounded in the reality of the fast-evolving 
job market, urgent teacher re-training and flexible pathways between different types of education 
have the potential to fill the skills mismatch (Mastercard Foundation, 2020).
On one side of the table we had Vice-Chancellors who are defending their curriculums, 
responding to business leaders’ criticism as they who were complaining about the mismatch 
between the skills that students have upon their graduation versus the skills that are needed in 
the job markets ( Charles Kimpolo, Director, AIMS, Rwanda).
Research also shows that there is potential for greater involvement by the private sector in digital 
skills-building throughout primary and secondary education and beyond.8 Employers can be 
passive or absent in the realm of skills-building and training young people as potential employees 
or when onboarding them. However, a growing number of digital platforms now bear the cost of 
building digital skills by organising internal or external bespoke corporate training programmes 
to upskill employees (Bester et al., 2020). Similarly, tech giants such as Amazon, Apple, Alphabet, 
Microsoft and Facebook have been taking the lead in providing digital skills and reskilling during 
the pandemic (Jones, 2020). This includes the development of services specifically targeting the 
African continent, such as Google’s Digital Skills for Africa (ibid.). Regardless of which stakeholder 
is speaking, it was noted by several consultation participants that young people themselves, as ‘key 
stakeholders in the conversation, were absent’. 
4.3 Digital-friendly learning approaches
As a result of the school closures due to Covid-19 (Kuwonu, 2020), the use of mixed mass media such 
as TV, radio, printed media and mobile phones became the only way for students to continue to learn. 
Platforms that can suit some people for example in my community that is at Swahilipot Hub we 
learn through Zoom and if you missed the classes then some link of the recordings is sent via 
team viewer ( Anonymous consultation participant).
However, while this worked for some communities, ensuring inclusion and accessibility based 
on the format, content and language of the learning rapidly became a crucial concern to ensure 
learning continuity for all young people.
Uganda, educational interventions have mainly been channelled through television, social media, 
and via radio. Many youth in village do not have access to any of this because they are poor  
(Consultation participant, practitioner, Uganda).
8  www.transformationalupskilling.org/22
ODI Working paper 
The pandemic has also highlighted the need for teachers to be trained to adapt to the lack of 
face-to-face time with students when interacting through digital means. This includes supplying 
teachers with the funds and equipment necessary to deliver teaching online, which was raised by 
one consultation participant. 
In the medium term, ‘mainstreaming formal education in technologies from the primary 
levels onwards, into educational systems’ (UNECA, 2014) will necessitate investments and 
commitments from governments as well as multi-level, cross-sectoral partnerships to continue 
improving infrastructure and equipment access, developing content and platforms for online 
education (Joynes, 2020). Additional research is needed to inform existing programmes and 
projects on how learners use their digital devices and engage with digital education interventions 
to take on greater ownership of the learning process and become more independent and 
disciplined (Moss Coflan et al., 2020).
In terms of learning approaches, global research shows that digital learning for young women 
needs to be enjoyable and practical, and that this group favour digital games (UNESCO and 
EQUALS Skills Coalition, 2020). The more skills are connected to real life issues, the more 
successful they will be among young women. For example, linking women-targeted technologies 
to health was found to be effective (ibid.). Hands-on education methods and digital games also 
seem to be best suited to transmit cultural ‘ideologies, teachings and aesthetics to indigenous 
youth’ (Minority Rights Group International, 2020). Through the technical development of video 
games, young people can contribute their unique cultural experiences, stories, practices and 
languages to build authentic representations of themselves and debunk stereotypes (ibid.).
During the consultation, a participant from the AIMS shared their experience of the Work-
Integrated Learning (WIL) concept that embeds academic learning within its application in 
the workplace. Another highlighted the improved availability of inexpensive components and 
mini PCs and programmable microcontrollers by Raspberry Pi that are progressively bridging 
the accessibility gap for learners9. Uganda-based organisation Fundi Bots10 aims to bridging 
technological divides between the classroom and the real world by giving youth learners the 
practical skills and resources to enable them to become innovative ‘problem-solvers experienced 
and knowledgeable employees, and exceptional technology entrepreneurs’.
9  https://www.raspberrypi.org / and https://www.arduino.cc/
10  http://fundibots.org/23
ODI Working paper 
5 Conclusion: what is needed for youth 
to thrive in digital societies?  
All children must be able to learn. The first step to ‘avert a lost COVID generation’ (UNICEF, 
2020a) is to close the digital divide . While young people are a non-homogenous group with 
multiple identities, they must all be adequately prepared and equipped to cope with today’s (and 
indeed tomorrow’s) fast-evolving and uncertain environment. Young people must be deliberately 
involved in decision-making in order to ensure policies do not have unintended consequences. 
Thinking about the unintended impact of current policies on different youth populations by 
deliberately involving them in decision-making must be a priority to avoid exacerbating existing 
vulnerabilities. Frontier technology can redefine the parameters of what youth believe to be 
possible (Cortesi et al., 2020) and can inspire them by exposing them to innovators they can relate 
to and identify with (ibid.). As a consultation participant illustrates, organisations working with 
and for youth must become facilitators and adapt to young people’s language:
Brands and organisations need to meet young people where they are by rethinking the use of 
language (vernacular where applicable and catchy phrases and lingo that will get youth hooked) 
and by incorporating characters in their storytelling. Furthermore, organisations should move into 
becoming facilitators of conversations and providers of spaces in which youth can network and 
share solutions to youth challenges (promote the idea of creating solutions for youth by youth)  
(Amantle Mokubung, Campaign Manager, Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator, South Africa).
Given that youth represent the largest demographic in many African countries, their views must 
be better incorporated into national decision-making through fora such as youth councils and 
youth parliaments to progressively bridge the generational divide. An intergenerational lens 
must be applied by leadership to decision-making, and accountability mechanisms should be 
put in place (African Leadership Institute and African Union’s Office of the Youth Envoy, 2020). 
Government youth strategies must be leveraged for implementation (OECD, 2020a) and updated 
in view of the new challenges raised by the Covid-19 pandemic. There should also be a concerted 
effort to give youth voices the opportunity to speak out and be heard in such forums. 
Young people need to be given the opportunity to participate in all aspects of the innovation cycle 
for the digital technologies and infrastructures that will affect them, from design to outreach 
and marketing. These approaches should take into account their views and local contexts and 
reflect their lived experiences, intersecting needs and aspirations, and go beyond short-term 
outcomes. Youth should also be empowered to use their digital skills to amplify the voice of 
their communities and contribute to the workforce effort to educate all generations to become 
digitally literate and act against disinformation and misinformation. This would go some way to 
improve the problem of rising youth unemployment in the continent, which has been exacerbated 
by the pandemic.24
ODI Working paper 
But before this can happen, basic needs such as access to electricity, basic literacy and economic 
constraints linked to the opportunity cost of learning have to be addressed. Digital literacy must 
be made mandatory in secondary education settings, and all groups, especially more vulnerable 
populations such as women and people with disabilities, should have access to the skills they need 
to prepare for life and work in a digital world. Technological access also needs to be addressed. 
Too many young people do not have regular access to the devices or data services necessary to 
be connected. Greater investments and incentives to telecoms and the private sector are needed 
to create opportunities to overcome the digital divide. 
At the same time, coordination mechanisms between grassroots, local, youth-led organisations 
and established (I)NGOs, international organisations and governments need to be prioritised. As a 
consultation participant pointed out, newly established local efforts and needs for resources and 
information can be overlooked in favour of long-standing organisations:
We found that, as we are relatively new (operating since October [2019]), it has been difficult to 
engage with organisations as they usually choose long-standing organisations that have a bigger 
name rather than grassroots like us ( Sarah Boateng, Founder, Investing in Girls Education in 
Africa (IGEA Enterprise), Ghana).
Innovative and unconventional partnerships rooted in indigenous youth knowledge must be 
designed to find rapid solutions and the financing needed to realise them. By capitalising on 
existing groups’ understanding of their communities’ needs with youth at the heart and sharing 
their knowledge and skills, these partnerships can create sustainable solutions to make the digital 
ecosystem an inclusive reality.
Collaborating with local inter-faith/faith-based institutions of learning could establish local 
enduring training centres firmly rooted in the local indigenous milieu which will not be suspect 
of ‘western’ cavalier interventionism ( Daniel Njoroge Karanja, researcher, lecturer and mediator 
in international conflict resolution, St. Mary’s University, US).
Partnerships can also help to put pressure on governments to improve internet access. Internet 
shutdowns and restrictions (AU, 2020) must be criminalised and governments perpetuating them 
held accountable. Global efforts to think about internet norms and rules and the roles of tech 
companies in enabling control of the internet are underway. There is a fundamental set of needs 
around meaningful access to the internet and children and youth need to learn 21st century and 
digital skills for the future of work through edtech. 
As critical thinkers, change-makers, innovators, communicators and leaders, young people have a 
critical role to play in the achievement of the SDGs (UN, n.d). Covid-19 has provided a glimpse of the 
need for ethically designed and implemented digital technologies to provide education and 25
ODI Working paper 
employment opportunities for youth as well as empowering them as future leaders. This means that 
lessons emerging from the unprecedented times we are experiencing should serve as ongoing and 
future changes for policy and practice to accomplish youth-centred digital ecosystems. 
Young women use masks during meeting at work, Ghana, 2020. Photo credit: Kwame Amo/Shutterstock
26
ODI Working paper 
Bibliography 
African Leadership Institute and African Union’s Office of the Youth Envoy 
(2020) Greater inclusion of African youth in public service and governance. Joint 
Report. Johannesburg: African Leadership Institute (https://au.int/sites/default/files/
documents/39165-doc-greaterinclusionofafricanyouthreportaugust2020.pdf).
Amdeselassie, T., Emirie, G., Gezahegne, K. et al . (2020a) ‘Experiences of vulnerable urban 
youth under covid-19: the case of domestic workers’. Policy brief. London: Gender and 
Adolescence: Global Evidence (https://www.gage.odi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
Experiences-of-vulnerable-urban-youth-under-covid-19-the-case-of-domestic-workers.pdf).
Amdeselassie, A.T., Emirie, G., Iyasu, A., et al . (2020b) ‘Experiences of vulnerable urban 
youth under Covid-19: the case of youth working in factories and industrial parks’. Policy 
brief. London: Gender and Adolescence: Global Evidence (https://www.gage.odi.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/08/Experiences-of-vulnerable-urban-youth-under-covid-19-the-
case-of-youth-working-in-factories-and-industrial-parks.pdf).
African Union – AU (2020) Facts and figures of Africa youth agency, challenges and recovery 
roadmap on Covid-19 . Africa Youth Lead Policy Paper. Addis Ababa: AU Commission 
(https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/39662-doc-facts_figures_of_africa_youth_
agency_challenges_and_recovery_roadmap_on_covid-19_au_1.pdf).
African Union Youth Envoy (2020) How do African youth access Covid-19 information? A 
report of a survey carried out by the African Youth Front on coronavirus. Survey Report. 
Addis Ababa: AU.
Alliance for Affordable Internet – A4AI (n.d.) ‘Meaningful connectivity – unlocking the full 
power of internet access’. Webpage. A4AI (https://a4ai.org/meaningful-connectivity/ ).
Ang, C. (2020) ‘What does 1GB of mobile data cost in every country?’. Visual Capitalist, 3 July 
(www.visualcapitalist.com/cost-of-mobile-data-worldwide /).
Arroyo Arroyo, F., Espinet, X. and Matekenya, D. (2019) ‘Through technology and creative 
thinking, African youth are reinventing the future of urban transport’. World Bank blog, 
19 September (https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/through-technology-and-creative-
thinking-african-youth-are-reinventing-future-urban).
Banga, K. (2019) ‘Why skills development is key for digital transformation in Africa’. Insight 
Blog. ODI (www.odi.org/blogs/why-skills-development-key-digital-transformation-africa). 
Bester, H., Carboni, I., van der Linden, A. et al. (2020) Skills for a digital economy with a 
focus on Ghana, Kenya and Senegal. Cenfri Report. Bellville: Cenfri (https://cenfri.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020.06-Skills-for-a-digital-economy.pdf).
Bosch, T. (2016) ‘Twitter activism and youth in South Africa: the case of #RhodesMustFall’ 
Information, Communication & Society 20(2): 221-232 ( www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10 .108
0/1369118 X.2016 .116282 9).27
ODI Working paper 
Business Daily (2020) ‘Kenya to host innovation centre for African youths’. 23 November 
(www.businessdailyafrica.com/bd/corporate/technology/kenya-to-host-innovation-centre-
for-african-youths-- 320677 8).
Cable.co.uk (2020) ‘Worldwide mobile data pricing: the cost of 1GB of mobile data in 228 
countries’. Electronic dataset, Cable.co.uk (www.cable.co.uk/mobiles/worldwide-data-pricing/).
Campanella, M. (2020) ‘TikTok in Africa empowers youth’. The Borgen Project, 29 June 
(https://borgenproject.org/tiktok-in-africa /).
Caribou Digital (n.d.) ‘Skills for a digital age’. Webpage. Caribou Digital (www.cariboudigital.
net/skillsforadigitalage/ ).
Chebbi, A. (2020) ‘Covid-19 in Africa: youth perspectives - Aya Chebbi’. Blog. Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation (https://mo.ibrahim.foundation/news/2020/covid-19-africa-youth-perspectives-
aya-chebbi).
Chirisa, I., Mutambisi, T., Chivenge, M. et al. (2020) ‘The urban penalty of Covid-19 
lockdowns across the globe: manifestations and lessons for Anglophone sub-Saharan 
Africa’ GeoJournal (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-020-10281-6).
Civic Tech Innovation Network (2020) ‘Looking to learn from African civic tech initiatives’. 
Webpost. Civic Tech Innovation Network (https://civictech.africa/looking-to-learn-from-
african-civic-tech-initiatives-2/ ).
Compact for Young People in Humanitarian Action (2020) ‘Covid-19: working with and for 
young people’. Guidance note. New York: UNFPA (https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/
resource-pdf/COMPACTCOVID19-05.pdf).
Cortesi, S., Hasse, A., Lombana-Bermudez, A. et al. (2020) ‘Youth and digital citizenship+ 
(plus): understanding skills for a digital world’. Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society 
Research Publication No. 2020-2 (http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3557518).
Curran, T. (2020) New narratives report. Report. London: British Council (www.britishcouncil.
org/sites/default/files/new_narratives_report.pdf).
Deloitte and Global Business Coalition for Education (2018) Preparing tomorrow’s 
workforce for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. For business: a framework for action. 
Report. London: Deloitte ( www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/about-deloitte/articles/gx-
preparing-tomorrow-workforce-for-the-fourth-industrial-revolution.html ). 
Department of Social Development (n.d.) ‘About us’ [Webpage] (http://gbv.org.za/about-us/).
Department for Transport (2016) ‘Road safety data’. Electronic dataset, Department for 
Transport, UK Government (https:// data.gov.uk/dataset/road-accidents-safety-data).
Donner, J., Dean, M., Osborn, J. et al. (2019) Platform-led transformational upskilling: how 
marketplace platforms can transform emerging markets by investing in skills development. 
Skills for a Digital Africa White Paper. Farnham: Caribou Digital (www.cariboudigital.net/wp-
content/uploads/2020/01/Platform-Led-Transformational-Upskilling-Whitepaper.pdf). 
Emirie, G., Iyasu, A., Gezahegne, K. et al . (2020) ‘Experiences of vulnerable urban youth 
under Covid-19: the case of youth with disabilities’. Policy brief. London: Gender and 
Adolescence: Global Evidence. 28
ODI Working paper 
Flood, Z. (2020) ‘How Africa’s tech innovators respond to the coronavirus pandemic’. Al 
Jazeera, 15 April (www.aljazeera.com/economy/2020/4/15/how-africas-tech-innovators-
respond-to-the-coronavirus-pandemic).
Fondation Hirondelle (2019) ‘Study on sources and circulation of information in North Kivu, 
DRC’. 11 November (www.hirondelle.org/de/studien/1000-social-influencers-in-the-drc-
our-joint-study-on-sources-and-circulation-of-information-in-north-kivu).
Ghoshal, N. (2020) ‘LGBT Africans share challenges of life during pandemic’. Human Rights Watch, 
19 May ( www.hrw.org/news/2020 /05/19/lgbt-africans-share-challenges-life-during-pandemic ). 
Government of Rwanda (n.d.) ‘Social transformation’ (www.gov.rw/highlights/social-
transformation).
GSM Association – GSMA (2015) Bridging the gender gap: mobile access and usage in low- 
and middle-income countries. Connected Women 2015 Report. London: GSMA (www.
gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-
Gender-Gap.pdf).
GSMA (2020a) The mobile economy: sub-Saharan Africa 2020 . GSMA Report. London: 
GSMA ( www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wp-content/uploads/2020 /09/GSMA _
MobileEconomy2020 _SSA _Eng.pdf ).
GSMA (2020b) Powering youth employment through the mobile industry in sub-Saharan Africa 
by 2025: spotlight on Ghana, Senegal and Nigeria. Report. London: GSMA ( www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2020 /01/CIU-Youth-Employment-in- SSA.pdf). 
GSMA (2020c) Mobile for humanitarian innovation. Annual Report. London: GSMA (www.gsma.
com/mobilefordevelopment/resources/mobile-for-humanitarian-innovation-annual-report/). 
GSMA (2020d) The state of mobile internet connectivity 2020 . Connected Society Report. 
London: GSMA ( https://www.gsma.com/r/somic /). 
GSMA (2020e) The mobile disability gap report. Report. London: GSMA ( www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/resources/the-mobile-disability-gap-report- 2020 /). 
Hassan, I. and Hitchen, J. (2020) ‘How hashtag activism moves offline in The Gambia’. 
Democracy in Africa, 29 September ( http://democracyinafrica.org/hashtag-activism-gambia /). 
Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator (2020) Mapping of digital and ICT roles and demand 
in South Africa. Final Report. Johannesburg: Harambee (http://digital.harambee.co.za/).
Honwana, A. and Honwana, N. (2020) ‘How are the youth stepping up to Covid-19 in 
Africa?’. Africa at London School of Economics (LSE) Blog. LSE (https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/
africaatlse/2020/07/06/youth-stepping-up-covid19-africa-community-technology/ ). 
Ichikowitz Family Foundation (2020) African youth survey 2020: the rise of afro-optimism. 
White paper. Johannesburg: Ichikowitz Family Foundation (https://ichikowitzfoundation.
com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/African-Youth-Survey-2020.pdf).
International Fund for Agricultural Development – IFAD (2019) Creating opportunities 
for rural youth. 2019 Rural Development Report. Rome: IFAD ( https://www.ifad.
org/documents/38714170 /41133075 /RDR _report.pdf/7282 db66 -2d67-b514 -d004 -
5ec25 d9729 a0).29
ODI Working paper 
International Finance Corporation – IFC (2020) e-Conomy Africa 2020: Africa’s $180 billion 
Internet economy future. Report. Washington DC: IFC (https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/
connect/publications_ext_content/ifc_external_publication_site/publications_listing_page/
google-e-conomy).
International Labour Organization – ILO (2020) Youth & Covid-19: impacts on jobs, 
education, rights and mental well-being. Survey Report. Geneva: ILO (www.ilo.org/global/
topics/youth-employment/publications/WCMS_753026/lang--en/index.htm).
Jones, C. (2020) ‘ These tech giants want to help prepare the world for the future of work’. 
World Economic Forum, 22 October ( www.weforum.org/agenda/2020 /10/technology-
giants-global-reskill-initiatives /).
Joseph, K. (2020) ‘Youth-led solutions during COVID-19: harnessing social media’. World 
Bank blog, 13 July (https://blogs.worldbank.org/jobs/youth-led-solutions-during-covid-19-
harnessing-social-media).
Joynes, C., Gibbs, E. and Sims, K. (2020) Overview of emerging country-level responses to 
providing educational continuity under Covid-19: what’s working? what isn’t? Report for 
EdTechHub (ODI). Reading: Education Development Trust (https://edtechhub.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/whats-working-whats-not.pdf).
Kaseje, N. and Kaseje, D. (2020) ‘How youth and technology can drive Africa’s Covid-19 
response’. Blog. World Economic Forum – WEF (www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/05/covid-
19-and-young-people-in-sub-saharan-africa/ ).
Kazeem, Y. (2020) ‘How a youth-led digital movement is driving Nigeria’s largest protests in a 
decade’. Quartz Africa, 13 October (https://qz.com/africa/1916319/how-nigerians-use-social-
media-to-organize-endsars-protests/ ).
Kim, H. and Care, E. (2020) Capturing 21st century skills: analysis of assessments in selected 
sub-Saharan African countries. Report. Washington DC: Brookings ( https://www.brookings.
edu/wp-content/uploads/2020 /09/UNESCO -Kim-Care_Africa-ministudy- 2020 .pdf).
Kuwonu, F. (2020) ‘Radio lessons: in Africa schools are closed, but learning goes on’. Africa 
Renewal, 15 May (www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/may-2020/coronavirus/africa-
schools-are-closed-learning-goes).
Madianou, M. (2019) ‘Technocolonialism: digital innovation and data practices in the 
humanitarian response to refugee crises’ Social Media + Society July-September 2019: 1–13 
(https://doi.org/10 .1177/205630511986314 6).
Mastercard Foundation (2020) Secondary education in Africa: preparing youth for 
the future of work. Report. Toronto: Mastercard Foundation (www.issuelab.org/
resources/35972/35972.pdf).
Mercy Corps (2019) The Weaponization of Social Media: How social media can spark violence 
and what can be done about it. Report. Oregon: Mercy Corps (https://www.mercycorps.
org/sites/default/files/2020-01/Weaponization_Social_Media_FINAL_Nov2019.pdf).
Minority Rights Group International (2020) Minority and indigenous trends 2020: focus on 
technology. Report. London: Minority Rights Group International (https://minorityrights.
org/trends2020/ ).30
ODI Working paper 
Moss Coflan, C., Chuang, R., Kaye, T. et al. (2020) ‘Nine takeaways from our reviews of 
COVID-19 education responses’. EdTech Hub, 31 August (https://edtechhub.org/2020/08/31/
nine-takeaways-from-helpdesk-reviews-of-covid-19-education-responses/ ).
Mpungose, L. (2020) ‘Issues affecting young women in Africa during Covid-19’. Africa Portal, 
24 July (https://www.africaportal.org/features/issues-affecting-young-women-africa-
during-covid-19/ ). 
Neary, M. (2020) ‘How technology can help youth cope during Covid-19 crisis’. Blog. Martha 
Neary/Medium (https://medium.com/psyberguide/how-technology-can-help-youth-cope-
during-covid-19-crisis-1cf70eae1365) .
Nganjo, M. (2020) ‘Covid-19 finds African youth capitalising on digital space’. Impakter, 29 
April (https://impakter.com/covid-19-finds-african-youth-capitalising-on-digital-space/ ).
Ntarangwi, M. (2020) ‘Social media and youth popular culture in Kenya can counter political 
exploitation’. LSE blog, 3 September (https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2020/09/03/social-
media-youth-popular-culture-music-kenya-counter-political-exploitation/ ).
Obia, V.A. (2020) ‘#EndSARS, a unique Twittersphere and social media regulation in Nigeria’. 
LSE blog, 11 November (https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2020/11/11/endsars-a-unique-
twittersphere-and-social-media-regulation-in-nigeria/ ).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development – OECD (2020a) ‘Youth and 
Covid-19’: response, recovery and resilience’. OECD Policy Brief. Paris: OECD (www.oecd.
org/coronavirus/policy-responses/youth-and-covid-19-response-recovery-and-resilience-
c40e61c6/ ).
OECD (2020b) ‘Young people and women hit hard by jobs crisis’. Data visualisation. OECD ( www.
oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/young-people-and-women-hit-hard-by-jobs-crisis ).
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner – OHCHR (2020) 
‘Covid-19 and young people: urgent action needed to stem “severe and long-lasting” 
impacts’. OHCHR News, 12 August ( www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/Youth_and_
COVID -19.aspx). 
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa – OSAA (2020) ‘Youth and creativity: the African 
response to Covid-19’. OSAA News. OSAA (www.un.org/en/africa/osaa/newsroom/2020/
news5.shtml).
Pinet, M., Boateng, E. and Sanyu, P. (2020a) ‘This is how the youth is mobilising tech during 
Covid-19’. Blog. African Arguments (https://africanarguments.org/2020/05/activists-not-
leaders-how-the-youth-have-used-tech-under-covid-19/ ).
Pinet, M., Unnikrishnan, V., Marc, L. et al. (2020b) Improving youth livelihoods in the Ghana 
cocoa belt: an impact evaluation of the MASO programme. Working Paper. London: ODI 
(https://www.odi.org/publications/17470 -improving-youth-livelihoods-ghana-cocoa-belt-
impact-evaluation-maso-programme ).
Plan International (2020a) ‘African girls in the Covid-19 pandemic’. Policy brief. Woking: Plan 
International ( https://plan-international.org/publications/african-girls-covid- 19-pandemic ).
Plan International (2020b) ‘Instagram teams up with girl activists to address online 
harrassment’. 10 October (https://plan-international.org/news/2020-10-10-instagram-
teams-girl-activists-address-online-harassment).31
ODI Working paper 
Rost, L., Samuels, F., Leon-Himmelstine, C. et al. (2020) Digital approaches to adolescent 
mental health: a review of the literature. ODI Working Paper. London: ODI (www.odi.org/
publications/17423-digital-approaches-adolescent-mental-health-review-literature).
Save the Children (2020 ) The global girlhood report: how Covid-19 is putting progress in peril. 
Report. London: Save the Children ( www.savethechildren.org/content/dam/usa/reports/ed-
cp/global-girlhood-report- 2020 .pdf). 
Schiff, A. and Carboni, I. (2020) ‘How do we develop work-ready youth in a digital age?’. Blog. 
Annabel Schiff/Medium (https://medium.com/caribou-digital/how-do-we-develop-work-
ready-youth-in-a-digital-age-e0ad006d162d).
Semo, B. and Frissa, S.M. (2020) ‘The mental health impact of the Covid-19 pandemic: 
implications for sub-Saharan Africa’ Psychology Research and Behavior Management 
2020(3): 713–720 ( https://dx.doi.org/10 .2147 /PRBM .S26428 6).
Sharma, A. (2020) ‘Understanding the skills-gap facing youth employment through the 
mobile industry’. Blog, 15 July. GSMA ( https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/blog-
2/understanding-the-skills-gap-facing-youth-employment-through-the-mobile-industry /). 
Sharpe, E. (2020) ‘Covid-19 Policy Brief: misinformation and freedom of expression’. 
Web Foundation Covid-19 Policy Brief. London: World Wide Web Foundation (http://
webfoundation.org/docs/2020/04/Covid-Policy-Brief-Misinformation_Public.pdf). 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute – SIPRI (2020) Online identity 
formation: a growing challenge to peace. Video recording of open session. SIPRI/YouTube, 
20 May (www.youtube.com/watch?v=dbCwaM20kXQ). 
Stork, C., Nwana, H.S., Esselar, S. et al. (2020) Over the top (OTT) applications & the 
internet value chain: recommendations to regulators, policy makers and tax authorities. 
Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation (CTO) Study Report. London: CTO 
(https://cto.int/wp-content/uploads/2020 /05/CTO -OTT -REPORT -2020 .pdf).
Tanner, J. (2020) ‘10 things to know about misinformation and disinformation’. ODI 
Briefing Note. London: ODI (www.odi.org/publications/17330-10-things-know-about-
misinformation-and-disinformation).
Tawil, S. (2020) ‘Six months into a crisis: reflections on international efforts to harness 
technology to maintain the continuity of learning’, Background Paper for Mobile Learning 
Week 2020. Paris: UNESCO ( https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223 /pf000037456 1). 
United Nations – UN (2020a) A UN framework for the immediate socio-economic response 
to Covid-19 . Report. New York: UN ( https://unsdg.un.org/resources/un-framework-
immediate-socio-economic-response-covid- 19). 
UN (2020b) ‘Innovative tech and connectivity key to fighting Covid-19 in Africa’. UN Africa 
Renewal News, 29 April (www.un.org/africarenewal/news/coronavirus/innovative-tech-and-
connectivity-key-fighting-covid-19-africa).
UN (2020c) ‘Covid-19 halting crucial mental health services in Africa, WHO survey’. UN Africa 
Renewal News, 9 October ( www.un.org/africarenewal/news/covid- 19-halting-crucial-
mental-health-services-africa-who-surve y).
UN (n.d.) ‘Youth – United Nations Sustainable Development’. Webpage. UN (www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/youth/ ).32
ODI Working paper 
UN Press Office (2020) ‘Narrowing digital divide could become “greatest equalizer” in 
promoting equality, Secretary-General tells online conference, calling on nations to 
support youth’. Secretary-General Statements and Messages Press Release SG/SM/20225, 
1 September (https://www.un.org/press/en/2020/sgsm20225.doc.htm).
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs – UN/DESA (2020) 
‘Protecting and mobilizing youth in Covid-19 responses’. UN/DESA Policy Brief #67. New 
York: UN/DESA (www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/publication/un-desa-policy-brief-67-
protecting-and-mobilizing-youth-in-covid-19-responses/ ).
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa – UNECA (2014) Youth and innovation in 
Africa: harnessing the possibilities of Africa’s youth for the transformation of the continent. 
Summary Report of Online (D-Groups) Discussions. Addis Ababa: UNECA 
(https://repository.uneca.org/handle/10855 /2282 7).
UNESCO and EQUALS Skills Coalition (2019) I’d blush if I could: closing gender divides in 
digital skills through education. Policy Paper. Paris: UNESCO (https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000367416.page=1).
United Nations Population Fund – UNFPA (2020a) ‘Covid-19 persons with disabilities: 
key messages’. UNFPA Infographic (www.unfpa.org/resources/covid-19-and-persons-
disabilities-key-messages).
UNFPA (2020b) ‘My body, my life, my world through a Covid-19 lens’. Technical Briefs. New 
York: UNFPA ( www.unfpa.org/featured-publication/my-body-my-life-my-world-through-
covid- 19-lens ).
UNICEF (2019) ‘Generation Unlimited Youth Challenge launched in search of Kenya’s 
young innovators’. Press release, 21 November (www.unicef.org/kenya/press-releases/
GenerationUnlimited).
UNICEF (2020a) ‘Averting a lost COVID generation: a six-point plan to respond, recover and 
reimagine a post-pandemic world for every child’. World Children’s Day 2020 Data and 
Advocacy Brief. New York: UNICEF (www.unicef.org/reports/averting-lost-generation-
covid19-world-childrens-day-2020-brief). 
UNICEF (2020b) ‘African youth offer solutions to COVID-19 challenges in their communities’. 
29 September ( www.unicef.org/esa/press-releases/african-youth-offer-solutions-covid- 19-
challenges-their-communities ). 
van den Berg, I. and Johnston, Z. (2019) Tech savvy: skills for the digital economy. Report 
on experimental qualitative research. Bellville: Cenri ( https://cenfri.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020 .05_Techsavvy-report-on-experimental-qualitative-research.pdf ).
van Deursen, A.J.A.M. and van Dijk, J.A.G.M. (2019) ‘The first-level digital divide shifts from 
inequalities in physical access to inequalities in material access’ New Media and Society 
21(2): 354–375 (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1461444818797082).
van Laar, E., van Deursen, A.J.A.M., van Dijk, J.A.G.M. et al. (2020) ‘Determinants of 21st-
century skills and 21st-century digital skills for workers: a systematic literature review’ SAGE 
Open (https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019900176).33
ODI Working paper 
Wasserman, H. and Madrid-Morales, D. (2019) ‘An exploratory study of “fake news” and 
media trust in Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa’ African Journalism Studies 40(1): 107–123 
(https://doi.org/10.1080/23743670.2019.1627230).
Weidmann, B.N., Benitez-Baleato, S., Hunziker, P. et al. (2016) ‘Digital discrimination: 
political bias in internet service provision across ethnic groups’ Science 353(6304): 1151–
1155 ( https://dx.doi.org/10 .1126/science.aaf506 2).
We Robotics (2021) ‘Foundation Botnar funds youth robotics across flying labs’. 20 January 
(https://blog.werobotics.org/2021 /01/20/fondation-botnar-funds-youth-robotics-across-
flying-labs /). 
World Bank (2020) ‘Global digital development policy response database’. Data visualisation 
and database. World Bank ( https://dataviz.worldbank.org/views/DD- COVID 19/Overview?:e
mbed=y&:isGuestRedirectFromVizportal=y&:display_count=n&:showAppBanner=false&:ori
gin=viz_share_link&:showVizHome=n ).
World Wide Web Foundation (2020) Women’s rights online: closing the digital gender 
gap for a more equal world. Report. London: World Wide Web Foundation (http://
webfoundation.org/docs/2020/10/Womens-Rights-Online-Report-1.pdf).