ENGLISH REVIEW: Journal of English Education  
Volume 8, Issue 2 , June 2020  p-ISSN 2301 -7554, e -ISSN  2541 -3643  
https://journal.uniku.ac.id/index.php/ERJEE  
 
255  APPLYING DIGITAL STORYTELLING TO IMPROVE INDONESIAN 
HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS’ VISUAL MEMORY AND WRITING 
SKILL   
 
Imam Sudarmaji   
Department of English Language Education, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education   
Universitas Islam Syekh -Yusuf, Indonesia  
E-mail: isudarmaji@unis.ac.id   
 
Agus Mulyana   
Department of English Language Education, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education   
Universitas Islam Syekh -Yusuf, Indonesia  
E-mail: amulyana@unis.ac.id   
 
Karsiyah  
Department of English Language Education, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education   
Universitas Islam Syekh -Yusuf, Indonesia  
E-mail: karsiyahvl@gmail.com   
 
APA Citation: Imam , S., Mulyana, A., & Karsiyah (2020 ). Applying digital storytelling to impr ove Indonesian 
high school students’ visual memory and writing skill . English Review: Journal of English 
Education, 8(2), 255-264. doi: 10.25134/erjee.v8i2.2987.  
 
Received:  12-02-2020  Accepted:  02-04-2020  Published:  01-06-2020  
 
Abstract:  This study investigated the use of digital storytelling in improving students’ visual memory and 
writing skill of tenth grade students in one of senior high school in Tangerang, Indonesia. A tota l of 72 
students are taken as the sample in the current study. The randomized pretest - posttest control group design 
was used in the study. Using quasi experimental research -non-equivalent control group design, the students 
in the experimental groups comp leted the process through digital storytelling. The students’ test and 
questionnaires were used to collect the data. In order to test whether there was an improvement within 
groups and to see if there were differences between groups, the hypotheses were te sted using the t -test and 
obtaining gain scores. The result showed that the visual memory and writing skill of students undergoing 
digital storytelling technique and of those undergoing conventional teaching but no significant differences 
were found betwee n the two conditions. They had same proficiency, focused and same concentration during 
the learning process, and the students had many opinions in experimental class. Based on the percentages , 
students’ post -test showed that students’ visual memory was mor e dominant than students’ writing skill after 
applying digital storytelling. Moreover, this research also found that students’ learning motivation was very 
good and created a good of class atmosphere in experimental class during the learning process by usi ng 
digital storytelling.  
Keywords:  digital storytelling; visual memory; writing skill . 
 
INTRODUCTION  
In the acquisition and fluency of language skills 
may be directly involved visual memory. 
Magnussen (2009) , said that memory is retain 
stimulus information in memory which is 
assessed in term precision. Visual memory is  one 
of the ability  to remember or recall such as 
images, scenes, words , and other  information  
which  presented visually. Visual  memory is 
important to develop, because according to 
Phillips & Christie (2013) , visual  memory  has a 
role in a wide variety  of everyday  tasks. It  has 
also been considered  fundamental  on every  type 
of academic  learning. The students  should be able 
to visualiz e the stimulus  in their mind.  Visual memory is a complex process for 
students. Current  theory  of visual working 
memory inv olving capacity and resolution as the 
two important aspects of visual working memory 
storage  (Yao, Chen, and Qian 2018) . The memory 
storage system of working memory includes 
subsystems . They maintain verbal, spatial, and 
visual information. The feel  is so hard to 
remember with what they have seen, so the 
students should learn and  understand the ability to 
store and recall mental images  in the memory  
efficiently  to help their learning a foreign 
language (Michel et al. 2019) . This memory will 
store in short -term memory, as many as students 
should remember with the duration is briefly to Imam Sudarmaji, Agus Mulyana, & Karsiyah  
Applying digital storytelling to improve Indonesian high school students’ visual memory and writing skill  
 256 see. Acco rding to Baddeley et al., (2015)  that 
short -term memory is able to store limited 
quantities of information for limited periods of 
time. So if the students’ did not pay attention, 
they will feel difficult in pl acing visual which 
means that they need stimuli for be able to 
visualize. The students may have difficulty during 
several operations such as remembering general 
view of words in reading and writing, also 
sequencing the letters if such skills have  not 
impro ved.   
While, writing is one of the four skills in 
English. The students felt that writing is as more 
complicated than the other skills  and became 
challenging area of language learning (Jabali 
2018) . Javed et al., (2013)  said that even native 
speakers of English can feel difficulty in 
demonstrating a good of writing. The students 
often feel confused when they are using the rules 
of writing such as grammatical and they also lac k 
of vocabulary. According to Ma’azi & Janfesha n 
(2018) and Nik et al., (2010)  said that writing has 
an important role which is assumed as the most 
complex process.  Sylvester & Greenidge (2009)  
stated that writing has difficulty to start and it is a 
very complex process to write, although after the 
teacher assists the students for prewriting 
activities such as brainstorming to generate the 
ideas or supports an upcoming writing 
assignment. Learning to write is a difficult and 
complex process because it concerned with the 
knowledge a bout the structure of language  
Rusinovci (2015) . Students also need to know 
how to express their idea, feeling, opinion, critical 
thinking in written text (Fadhly 2014) .   
The stud ents still do not understand how to 
write in English and they don’t know their 
mistakes on their writing. The technique or 
strategies to teach writing may not be interesting 
for the students. Klimova (2014)  claimed that if 
the teacher uses appropriate technique/strategies 
to teach the students, it can be more inter esting 
and considers students’ personality. Writing 
instruction in language teaching and learning can 
improve students’ writing skill (Coker et al. 
2018) . Teacher should pay attention to the 
students’ writing strategies and the types of 
writing instructions (Bai 2018; Palermo and 
Thomson 2018)  
The current advancement in the information 
and communicatio n technology (ICT) or digital 
era has provided the learners with various tools 
with the form of computer -based or Internet -
based resources . Many teachers n ow use  digital 
tools in addition to other instruction methods and not as a substitute learning  (Hillmayr et al. 2020) . 
Digital Learning can help students take charge of 
their own lear ning and make them fun (Schmoelz 
2018; Zwart et al. 2020) . The use of digital 
technology can amplify this experience and 
provide a concrete support in the development of 
language and communication skills  (Rubegni and 
Landoni 2018; Thang et al. 2 014). One of the 
technique in language teaching is digital 
storytelling  (DST) . DST technique  helps students 
develop their better language skills and this 
technique can be considered as an essential tool in 
foreign language learning and teaching  (Razmi, 
Pourali, and Nozad 2014) .  
DST which combines the characteristic of 
storytelling with different interactive media tools 
can benefit language learning in a variety of 
ways. It was found to encourage and motivate 
students and  at the same time enhance their 
communication skills (Ciğerci and Gultekin 2017; 
Thang et al. 2014) . DST helps students to find, 
apply, learn, and share each other various amount 
of vocabulary and moreover helps them to think 
critically due to the limitation of script writing 
and presen ted digitally (Tajeri, Syal, and Marzban 
2017) . Teachers can provide students a sharing 
experience to enhance learning through seeing, 
hearing, and feeling (Beck and Sitzman 2019) . 
DST is also a good technique that suitable for 
the students to teach visual memory and  writing, 
also can help the students to improve their visual 
memory capacity and writing skill  (Sarica and 
Usluel 2016) . Some researcher s said that digital 
storytelling gives positive effect for the students. 
According to Gallets (2005)  that through 
storytelling, students can be mo re thinking and 
imaginative skill. Also their mental process 
played more active role. Story will influence 
memory, and the storytelling can facilitate 
students’ cognitive changes (Schank and Abelson 
1995) . Besides visual memory, digital storytelling 
can be used as an effective learning tool to 
improve students’ writing skill (Xu et al., 2011; 
Campbell, 2012; Yang & Wu, 2012; Sarica & 
Usluel, 2016; Yamaç & Ulusoy, 2016; Tarigan & 
Liana, 2018) . Abdel -Hack & Helwa (2014)  also 
said that through digital storytelling, narrative 
writing and critical thinking skills were 
developed.  
In the latest decade, many researc her 
conducted the research to investigate the use of 
digital story telling in language learning.  First, 
Eman Mohamed & Hasnaa Sabry, (2014)  had a 
research which investigated the effectiveness of 
using digital storytelling and Weblogs instruction ENGLISH REVIEW: Journal of English Education  
Volume 8, Issue 2 , June 2020  p-ISSN 2301 -7554, e -ISSN  2541 -3643  
https://journal.uniku.ac.id/index.php/ERJEE  
 
257  in enhancing EFL narrative writing and critical 
thinking skills a mong EFL majors at Faculty of 
Education. The result showed that using digital 
storytelling and Weblogs instruction is effective 
in enhancing the EFL narrative writing and 
critical thinking skills among EFL majors at 
Faculty of Education.  Second, Sarica & Usluel, 
(2016)  investigated the effect of digital 
storytelling on the visual memory capacity and 
writing skills of students  in primary school . Then, 
Tarigan & Liana, (2018)  conducted the research 
to examine the effectiveness of us ing digital story 
telling in teaching writing skill of students in 
higher education or university. The result showed 
that the students’ writing skill are improved after 
implementing digital story telling as the teaching 
media. The study showed that digital  story telling 
is effective to enhance students’ writing skill. The 
previous research focus on the subject in primary 
school and university. The current study intend to 
confirm  the use of digital storytelling as a 
language  teaching technique  in foreign lan guage 
class  in senior secondary school . The focus of the 
study is to know whether there is any significant 
effect of digital storytelling on the students’ 
visual memory and writing skill,  to know which 
one is more dominant between students’ visual 
memory a nd writing skill , and to know how the 
students’ learning motivation and class 
atmosphere through applying digital storytelling .   
 
METHOD  
This study used experimental method. The design 
of this study was a quasi -experimental research - 
non-equivalent contro l group design. The 
researcher chose this design, because according to 
Fraenkel  et al., (2012)  there were two different 
classes’ treatment, namely experimental class and 
control class, and do not include the use of 
random assignment.  This study was conducted 
by the researcher who taught in two different 
classes, namely experimental  class and control 
class. Where experimental class was the class that 
applied by using digital storytelling, and control 
class that applied by using conventional  teaching 
(gallery walk).  
 
Table 1. Research d esign  
Class   Test   Treatments   Test   
EC Pre-test  
O1a X1 Post-test  
O1b 
CC Pre-test  
O2a  
X2 Post-test  
O2b 
Source: Processed Primary Data (2019)  
  Information:  
 EC  = experiment class  
CC  = control class  
O1a  = pre -test at experiment class  
O2a  = pre -test at control class  
X1  = DST tech nique application  
X2  = conventional technique    
   application  
O1b   = learning outcomes of experiment  
     class after treatment  
O2b   = learning outcomes of control  
 
The population of this study was all of 
students in tenth grade in one senior high school 
in Tangerang in Academic Year 2019/2020. 
While, the sample was students in MIPA  (Science 
Class) 1  as the experimental group  and MIPA 
(Science) Class 2  as the control group . The 
researcher chose the sample based on the 
previous information, their pro ficiency, and their 
relevancy with the study purpose.   
The data of this study was quantitative data. 
The quantitative data were obtained by the scores 
of students’ task from pre -test and post -test.  
Writing test instrument and questionnaire are 
used to co llect the data. After the students’ visual 
memory and writing scores had been collected, 
the researcher analyzed the data using one paired 
t-test to see the comparison between pre -test and 
post-test mean scores and to see the effect of 
using  digital  storyt elling on students’ visual 
memory  and writing skill. It also enabled the 
researcher to know the dominant between visual 
memory and writing skill after applying digital 
storytelling. While, questionnaire were used to 
know the added value that wanted to be k nown in 
the achievement of students’ learning outcomes 
was the students’ learning motivation and class 
atmosphere.  
 
RESULTS  AND DISCUSSION  
The classroom observation data showed that the 
result of experimental class and control class. In 
experimental class,  the researcher started by 
giving materials about narrative text and how to 
write narrative text by using digital, it such as by 
Power Point. Then, show the videos of the stories 
including with the sound system. After students 
watched, some pictures of the  stories showed to 
them. They have to remember and understand of 
the story and can re -write the story of narrative 
text that they remembered. While, in control class 
the researcher gave the material about narrative 
text and how to write it by using convent ional 
teaching (gallery walk). They have to remember Imam Sudarmaji, Agus Mulyana, & Karsiyah  
Applying digital storytelling to improve Indonesian high school students’ visual memory and writing skill  
 258 and understand on it. The researcher rewrite the 
sample of story by written on the whiteboard. 
Then, asked the students to rewrite the story of 
narrative text that they remembered.   
This research also m easured the level of 
motivation of students after learning by using 
digital storytelling technique. Questionnaire of 
learning motivation that has been given to the 
students in experimental class during the learning 
process. Besides measuring of the learnin g 
motivation, researcher also measured the level of 
the class atmosphere. The score of class 
atmosphere was obtained from questionnaire that 
has been given to the students in experimental 
class during the learning process by using digital 
storytelling tech nique.   
  
Students’ score of visual memory   
The students’ score in experimental class and 
control class are increased. As the Minimum 
Mastery Criterion (KKM) at the tenth grade is 67. 
Based on the result that there was no students not 
pass on visual memo ry in experimental class that 
taught by using digital storytelling technique. 
100% students can pass KKM values means the 
students got the score than 67 as KKM values.  
While, based on the visual memory test that 
was given in control class the researcher g ot the 
total score was 11% students could not pass KKM 
values and 89% students could pass KKM values. 
It means, almost all of students in control class 
have score more than 67. Even though there are 
several students got the score gain with KKM 
values.   
 
Students’ score of writing skill  
The students’ score in experimental class and 
control class are increased, but many students 
have a score below the minimum criteria (KKM). 
In experimental class 42% students could not 
achieve KKM values and 58% students co uld 
achieve KKM values. While, in control class 56% 
students could not achieve KKM values and 44% 
students could achieve KKM values. It can be 
seen from graphic below:    
Figure 1. Students’ post -test in experiment and 
control cl ass 
 
Students’ learning motivation in experimental 
class  
In this research, the students’ learning motivation 
which measured by criteria that is consists of 1% 
- 20% = bad, 21% - 40% = not good, 41% - 60% 
= sufficient, 61% - 80% = good, 81% - 100% = 
very go od. This research analyzed by obtaining 
the total score of learning motivation, and got the 
total was 2321. So, based on the criteria of 
percentages that can be categorized that the 
students’ learning motivation was very good 
during the learning process by  using digital 
storytelling with percentages 81%.  
 
Class a tmosphere in experimental class  
The  questionnaire  of  class atmosphere 
has six statements which is given by the 
researcher to know the students’ perception and 
participation about class atmospher e during the 
learning process. The result of every statements 
can be explained as follows:  
 
Class atmosphere  
The criteria of class atmosphere can be 
categorized by successive interval became 3 
points with the higher score was 4,204 means the 
students answ ered good, 2,621 means the students 
answered sufficient, and the lower was 1,000 
means the students answered bad. This resea rch 
got the students’ answer as the following table:  
 
Table 2. Atmosphere class in experimental class  
Categories  Total of 
Students  Percentages  Answer  
1 – 1,40 4 11% Bad 
1,42 – 2,81 26 72% Sufficient  
2,82 – 4,22 6 17% Good  
Source: Students’ questionnaire data   
    
0 % 10  %  % 20 30 % 40  %  50 % % 60 
EC CC  higher than  
KKM  
lower than  
KKM 
  42 %   58 %   
% 44   56 %   ENGLISH REVIEW: Journal of English Education  
Volume 8, Issue 2 , June 2020  p-ISSN 2301 -7554, e -ISSN  2541 -3643  
https://journal.uniku.ac.id/index.php/ERJEE  
 
259  Based on the table above, it can be explained 
that the students who answer bad was 4 students 
with the percentages 11%, 2 6 students who 
answer sufficient with the percentages 72%, and 
the last, the students who answer good was 6 
students with the percentages 17%.  It can be 
concluded that the students are more dominant 
answer sufficient. So, the researcher find out 
during th e learning process by digital storytelling 
was sufficient.  
 
The students do not understand during the 
learning process  
  
 
Figure 2. Students’ participation of class 
atmosphere  
 
The students who do not understand the 
material du ring the learning process would: 1) 
raise their hand and asked for more explanation 
was 53% can be categorized as the students 
active, 2) went to teacher after class to ask for 
more explanation was 25% can be categorized as 
the students initiative, and 3) did nothing was 
22% can be categorized as the students silent.  
 
Time passed most quickly during the learning 
process  
During the learning process, time passed most 
quickly for students. The answer from the 
statement contained of 3 answers were: 1) the 
teacher was teaching him/herself was 25%, 2) 
students solved the problem by themselves was 
56%, and 3) the students did the exercise 
individually was 25%.  
 
Students disagree with the teacher or they have 
a comment  
The answer from the statement contained 3 
answers were: 1) students said that immediately was 61% can be categorized as an active students, 
2) students waited until after class and told it to 
the teacher was 25% can be categorized an 
initiative students, and 3) students remained silent 
was 14%. The following graphic explained about 
the students disagree when they have an argument 
during the learning process:  
Figure 3. Students disagree in learningprocess  
 
The teacher who teach with the conventional 
learning   
The answers from the statement contained  3 
answers were: 1) students can easily follow 
without having friend disturbing them was 44%, 
2) students talked to fellow students about how 
they experienced the course after class was 42%, 
3) there was at least no turmoil as we don’t have 
to work togethe r was 14%.   
  
The process during learning in class  
The criteria of the process during learning in class 
categorized by successive interval became 3 
points with the higher score was 3,530 means the 
students answered lot, 2,214 means the students 
answered sufficient, and the lower score was 
1,000 means the students answered nothing. The 
process during learning in class got the students’ 
answer as the following table:  
 
Table 3. The process during learning in class  
Categorizes  Total of 
Students  Percentage
s Answer  
1 – 1,18 5 14% Nothing  
1,19 – 2,37 16 44% Sufficient  
2,38 – 3,56 15 42% Lot 
Source: Students’ questionnaire data  
  
From the table above explained that the 
students who answered nothing was 14%, the 
students who answered sufficient was 44%, and 
the students who answered lot was 42%.   
 Based on analyzed from sixth statements 
above that has been explained one by one can be     
0  %  10  %  20  %  30  %  40 % 50  %  60  %  
Total Score  53  %  
25 % 22  %  
active initiative  silent  
61%
25%
14%
0%20%40%60%80%Total Score
active initiative silentImam Sudarmaji, Agus Mulyana, & Karsiyah  
Applying digital storytelling to improve Indonesian high school students’ visual memory and writing skill  
 260 concluded overall by obtaining the total score 
with the criteria of class atmosphere were 1% - 
33% = bad, 34% - 67% = sufficien t, and 68% - 
100% = good. This research got the total score 
from the questionnaire data was 439,744 that can 
be categorized was 68% which means the class 
atmosphere using digital storytelling was good 
with the students were active during learning process s uch as students ask to the teacher for 
more explanation, also when they have an 
argument and disagree about the material with at 
least of students remained silent.  
After know ing that the data was normal and 
homog eneous because the significance  was more 
than 0,05, for the further testing the researcher 
testing hypotheses test (t -test).  
 
Table 4. Independent  sample test  
Assumption  Levene's Test 
for Equality 
of Variances  t-test for Equality of Means  
F Sig. t Df Sig. (2 -
tailed)  Mean 
Difference  Std. Error 
Difference  95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference  
Lower  Upper  
Equal variances 
assumed  .605 .439 -1.425  70 .159 -6.389  4.484  -15.331  2.554  
Equal variances 
not assumed    -1.425  68.439  .159 -6.389  4.484  -15.335  2.557  
Source: Statistical result S PSS 25  
 
In this research, the researcher used statistical 
calculating of t -test formula to find out the effect 
of using digital  storytelling in teaching  narrative  
text on the students’ visual  memory. The 
researcher analyzed the result 72 of the 
difference s score experimental class  and control 
class. The alternative hypotheses (Ha) stated that 
there is no significant differences between 
experimental class that using  digital storytelling  
and control class that using gallery walk. In this data analyzed, the r esearcher used t -test and the 
result of them consulted with the t -table.  
Based on the table above, it is know 
  
> 
  (-1,425 > -1,994) with sig = 0, 159 > 
0,05, it can be concluded that Ho is accepted and 
Ha is rejected, it means the re is no significant 
differences of visual memory between 
experimental class and control class at the tenth 
grade of high school in Tangerang.  
 
Table 5. Independent Sample Test 
Assumption  Levene's Test 
for Equality 
of Variances  t-test for Equality of Mean s 
F Sig. t Df Sig. (2 -
tailed)  Mean 
Difference  Std. Error 
Difference  95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference  
Lower  Upper  
Equal variances 
assumed  .431 .513 -1.639  70 .106 -4.556  2.779  -10.099  .988 
Equal variances 
not assumed    -1.639  69.291  .106 -4.556  2.779  -10.100  .989 
Source: Statistical result SPSS 25  
 
In this research, the researcher used statistical 
calculating of t -test formula to find out the effect 
of using digital storytelling in teaching narrative 
text on the students’ writing ski ll. The researcher 
analyzed the result 72 of the differences score 
experimental class and control class. The 
alternative hypotheses (Ha) stated that there is no 
significant differences between experimental 
class that using digital storytelling and control class that using gallery walk. In this data 
analyzed, the researcher used t -test and the result 
of them consulted with t -table.   
 Based on the table above, it is known 
 (-1,639 > -1,994) with sig = 
0, 106 > 0,05, it can be conc luded that Ho is 
accepted and Ha is rejected, it means there is no 
significant differences of writing skill between 
  >   
ENGLISH REVIEW: Journal of English Education  
Volume 8, Issue 2 , June 2020  p-ISSN 2301 -7554, e -ISSN  2541 -3643  
https://journal.uniku.ac.id/index.php/ERJEE  
 
261  experimental class and control class at the tenth 
grade of high school in Tangerang. So, digital 
storytelling that applied by the researcher  has no 
difference to improve the students’ writing  skill at 
the tenth of high school in Tangerang.  
From the students’ analysis of visual memory 
and writing skill taught by using digital 
storytelling in experimental class and by using 
gallery walk in cont rol class, the researcher has 
found the result of students’ visual memory and 
writing skill. The researcher have just given the 
pre-test, treatment, and post -test in order to know 
the students’ visual memory and writing skill.   
The result of teaching visu al memory and 
writing skill taught by the researcher using digital 
storytelling technique was good, because the 
students’ scores are increased between pre -test 
and post -test score. So, their visual memory and 
writing skill had improved. The score of post -test 
was higher than pre -test. In visual memory 100% 
students can pass KKM values and in writing skill 
58% students can pass KKM values. Based on the 
percentages, students’ post -test of visual memory 
is more dominant than writing skill after applying 
digita l storytelling technique.   
The testing of research hypotheses indicated 
that Ho is accepted and Ha is rejected, it means 
there is no significant difference of using digital 
storytelling on the students’ visual memory and 
writing skill. This research is re lated with the 
previous research such as from Sarica & Usluel 
(2016)  about visual memory that is no statistical 
difference was found that the  students  less 
interaction  with visuals  in experimental class than  
control class. But , this research did not 
correspond to Sarica & Usluel (2016)  for writing  
skill that can be said the significant result to 
improve  writing skill of students in experimental 
and control class. Also from Yamaç & Ulusoy 
(2016)  stated that through digital  storytelling  
could successfully result in improvement 
students’ writing skill. Tarigan & Liana (2018)  
said that the students’ writing skill after using  
digital  storytelling technique was significantly 
higher than before their used. Although 
fundamentally that vi sual memory need  to take  a 
long time to  develop, because the  development of 
memory  capacity begins in  infancy and continues  
through  early  adulthood (Terry, 2009) . While, 
also for  writing is assumed the most difficult to 
be learnt by the student s. As Brown (2007)  stated 
that there are many aspects that can be assessed 
when the teacher s measure the students’ writing  
skill such as content, organization, grammar, vocabulary, mechanic and the score of writing 
test was taken based on proficiency categories.  
In this research, there is no different between 
experimental and control class. Although there is 
no activities related to the digital storytelling were 
conducted in control class, because the condition 
of the students were same and had same 
proficiency. They focused and had concentration 
when researcher/teacher taught the students either 
by digital  storytelling or gallery walk, but the 
students have many opinions in experimental 
class. So that the learning outc omes obtained 
almost same or have  no different.   
Based on this matter, the researcher 
conducted by giving questionnaire to get the 
students’ learning motivation and atmosphere 
class during the learning process in experimental 
class by using digital storyt elling technique. The 
result showed that the application of this 
technique had proven to have a very good effect 
in increasing learning motivation. In addition, this 
technique also could create a good and conducive 
classroom atmosphere, students active to ask and 
students able to solve problem. Witte & Rogge 
(2014)  stated  that if the students are active during 
the learning process, so the technique has positive 
effect and it can believe the students’ learning 
motivation and class atmosphere were better.  
 
CONCLUSION  
The students’ score of visual  memory in 
experimental  class are increased after applying 
digital storytelling. The students’ score of post -
test was higher that pre -test, it was 100% students 
can pass KKM (Minimum Mastery Criterion) 
values. While, the students’ score of writing  skill 
in experimental class als o increased after 
applying  digital  storytelling. The score of post -
test was higher than pre -test, it was 58% students 
can pass KKM values. So, the level of 
achievement of the KKM values from these had 
improved.  
Based on the percentages of students’ post -
test score that visual  memory was more dominant 
than writing skill after applying digital  
storytelling  at the tenth grade students of higher 
school in Tangerang in academic year 2019/2020.  
The result of statistic which obtained by 
analyzing data through t -test of statistic 
calculation, it indicated that Ho is accepted and 
Ha is rejected which means that there is no 
significant difference of using  digital storytelling  
on the students’  visual  memory and writing  skill 
at the tenth grade of higher school in Tan gerang . Imam Sudarmaji, Agus Mulyana, & Karsiyah  
Applying digital storytelling to improve Indonesian high school students’ visual memory and writing skill  
 262 Some factors influenced no statistical 
difference between experimental class and control 
class due to the condition of students were same 
proficiency, and from both of classes that the 
students focused and had concentration when the 
teacher giving the materials either by digital  
storytelling or gallery walk, also the students in 
experimental have many opinions during the 
learning process. So, that the learning outcomes 
were same or no have different.   
  Although there is no statistical different, 
digital  storytelling can contribute in experimental 
class. It can be proved from the students’ 
questionnaire showed that the students’ learning 
motivation  was very good and created a good  
class atmosphere. Almost all of students are 
interested with the tech nique of teaching and they 
are active during the learning process by using  
digital  storytelling.  
 
REFERENCES  
Abdel -Hack, E. M., & Helwa,  H. S. A. A. (2014 ). 
Using digital storytelling and weblogs 
instruction t o enhance EFL narrative writing and 
critical thinking skills among EFL majors at 
faculty of education . International Research 
Journal  5(1):8 –41. 
Baddeley, A. Eysenck,  M. W., & Anderson , M. C . 
(2015) . Memory  (2nd ed.) London: Psychology 
Press.  
Bai, B. (2018 ). Understanding primary school 
students’ use of self -regulated writing strategies 
through think -aloud protoco ls. System, 78, 15-
26. 
Beck, M. S. , & Sitzman. K ( 2019 ). Compelling reasons 
for using digital stories to teach: A descriptive 
qualitative study.  Teaching and Learning in 
Nursing , 14(4), 265–269. 
Campbell, T.  A. (2012 ). Digital storytelli ng in an 
elementary classroom: G oing beyond 
entertainment . Procedia Social and Behavioral 
Sciences  69 (Iceepsy), 385–393. 
Ciğerci, F. M. , &  Gultekin . (2017 ). Use of  digital 
stories to develop listening comprehension skills.  
Issues in Educational Research , 27(2), 252–268. 
Coker, D. L., Austin , S. J., Elizabeth, F. R. , & 
MacArthur , C. A . (2018). When the type of 
practice m atters: The relationship between 
typical writin g instruction, student practice, and 
writing achievement in first gra de. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology  
54(June), 235–46. 
Eman, M. , Abdel -Hack, & Abdel -Hamid A. H. H. S . 
(2014 ). Using digital storytelling and weblogs 
instruction to enha nce EFL narrati ve writing and 
critical thinking skills among  EFL majors at 
faculty of educati on. International Research 
Journal , 5(1), 8–41. Fadhly, F. Z .. & Nurendah . (2014 ). Applying scientific 
approach to enhance Indonesian EFL lear ners’ 
descriptive writing . English R eview: Journal of 
English Education , 1(2), 114–124. 
Fraenkel, J. R., Wallen , N. E. , & Helen , H. (2012 ). 
How to design and evaluate research in 
educa tion (8th ed.). New York: McGraw -Hill. 
Gallets, M.  P. (2005). s torytelling and story reading: A  
comparison o f effects on children’s memory and 
story comprehension . ProQuest Dissertations 
and Theses . Tennesse: East Tennessee State 
University . 
Hillmayr, D., Ziernwald,  L., Reinhold,  F., Sarah I. H., 
& Reiss, K. M. (2020). The potential of digital 
tools to enhance m athematics and science 
learning in secondary schools: A  context -specific 
meta -analysis . Computers and Education  153(2), 
103897.  
Jabali, O. (2018). Students’ attitudes towards EFL 
university writi ng: A  case study at An-Najah 
national university , Palestine.  Heliyon,  4(11).  
Javed, M., Wu ,  X. J. , & Nazli , S.  ( 2013 ). A study of 
students’ ssses sment in writing skills of the 
English language . International Journal of 
Instruction , 6(2). 
Klimova, B. F. ( 2014 ). Constraints and difficulties in 
the process of writing  acquisition. Procedia - 
Social and Behavioral Sciences , 122, 433–437. 
Ma’azi, H. , & Janfeshan . K. (2018 ). The effect of 
edmodo social learning network on Iranian EFL 
learners writing skill . Cogent Education , 5(1), 1–
17. 
Magnussen, S. (2009). Implicit visu al working 
memory.  Scandinavian Journal of Psychology  
50(6). 
Michel, M., Kormos, J., Brunfaut,  T., &  Ratajczak , M.. 
(2019 ). The role of working memory in young 
second language learners’ written performances.  
Journal of Second Language Writing  45(March), 
31–45. 
Nik, Y. A., Hamzah,  A., &  Hasbollah , H. (2010 ). Why 
writing in ESL is difficult for undergraduates in 
a public university in Malaysia. Journal of 
Language Teaching and Research , 1,1–7. 
Palermo, C. , & Thomson , M. M. (2018). Teacher 
implementation of s elf-regulated strategy 
development with an automated writing 
evaluation system: Effects on the argumentative 
writing performance of middle school students.  
Contemporary Educational Psychology  54(2), 
255–70. 
Phillips, W. A., & Christie , D. F. M . (2013 ). 
Com ponents of visual memory . Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology , 29(1), 
117–33. 
Razmi, M., Pourali,  S., Nozad , S. (2014 ). Digital 
storytelling in EFL c lassroom (O ral p resentation 
of the sto ry): A pathway to improve oral 
productio n. Procedia - Social  and Behavioral 
Sciences , 98(2011), 1541 –44. ENGLISH REVIEW: Journal of English Education  
Volume 8, Issue 2 , June 2020  p-ISSN 2301 -7554, e -ISSN  2541 -3643  
https://journal.uniku.ac.id/index.php/ERJEE  
 
263  Rubegni, E., & Landoni , M. (2018 ). How to design a 
digital storytelling authoring tool for developing 
pre-reading and pre -writing skil ls. Proceed ings 
of the 2018 CHI Conference.  
Rusinovci, X. (2015 ). Teaching writing through 
process -genre based approac h.) US-China 
Education Review , 5(10), 699–705. 
Sarica, H. C., &  Usluel , Y. K . (2016 ). The effect of 
digital storytelling on visual memory and writing 
skills . Computers and Education , 94, 298–309. 
Schank, R. C., & Abelson , R P . (1995 ). Knowledge 
and m emory: The real stroy . Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.  
Schmoelz, A. (2018 ). Enabling co-creativity through 
digital storyelling in educatio n. Thinking Skills 
and Creativity , 28, 1–13. 
Sylvester, R., & Greenidge , W . (2009 ). Digital 
storytelling: Extending the potential for 
struggling write rs. The Reading Teacher , 63(4), 
284–295. 
Tajeri, M., Syal , P., & Marzban , S. (2017 ). Enhancing 
vocabulary and writing skill s through I-
Manager.  Journal of Educational Technology , 
14(3), 40–48. 
Tarigan, K. E., &  Liana. (2018 ). Improving students’ 
writing descriptive text through digital 
storytelling technique.  Budapest International 
Research and Critics Institute (BIRCI -Journal) : 
Humanities and Social Sciences , 1(3), 345–351. 
Thang, S. M. , Lee,  Y. S.,  Mahmud, N., Lin, L. K.,  
Zabidi,  N. A., &  Ismail , K. (2014 ). Enhancing 21st century learning skills via digital 
storytelling : Voices of Malaysian teachers and 
undergraduates.  Procedia - Social and 
Behavioral Sciences , 118, 489–494. 
Xu, Y., Par k, H., & Baek , Y. (2011 ). A new approach 
toward digital storytellin g: An activity focused 
on writing self -efficacy in a virtual learning 
environmen t. Educational Technology and 
Society , 14(4), 181–91. 
Yamaç, A., & Ulusoy , M. (2016 ). The effect of digital 
storytelling in improving the third graders’ 
writing ski lls. International Electronic of 
Elementary Education , 9(September), 59–86. 
Yang, Y. C., & Wan-chi, I. W. (2012 ). Digital 
storytelling for enhancing student academic 
achievement, critical thinking, and  learning 
motivatio n: A year-long experimental stu dy. 
Computers & Education , 59(2), 339–352. 
Yao, N.,  Chen,  S., &  Qian , M. (2018 ). Trait anxiety is 
associated with a decreased visual working 
memory capacity for faces . Psychiatry Research , 
270, 474–482. 
Zwart, D. P., Noroozi, O., Luit, J E. H. V., Goei, S. L., 
& Nieuwenhuis , A. (2020 ). Effects of digital 
learning materials on nursing students’ 
mathematics learning, self -efficacy, and task 
value in vocational edu cation.  Nurse Education 
in Practice , 44, 10275 5. 
 
 
 Imam Sudarmaji, Agus Mulyana, & Karsiyah  
Applying digital storytelling to improve Indonesian high school students’ visual memory and writing skill  
 264  