Crop Specific Mobile Apps
Case study by UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy 
Name Location
Year launchedReachImplementing organizationCrop Specific Mobile Apps
Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)
© Jayalaxmi Agrotech/Anil Kumar
India, Myanmar and Ghana2015
Focus of intervention
Provide agricultural advisory support from 
planting to harvesting through mobile appsOver 170,000 unique downloads  since launch
UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World2
Summary
In 2014, the agricultural industry accounted for almost 20 per cent of India’s 
economy and 50 per cent of its workforce (UNSD, 2017). Dissemination of information is the most vital function of extension services in order to ensure successful agricultural practices and decision-making (Sajesh and Suresh, 2016). However, Indian farmers face several barriers in gaining access to resources to improve their crop yields. Government extension programmes and services are severely constrained by resource limitations (NSSO, 2005), and despite impressive uptake in mobile phone usage in recent years, over one billion people in India remain offline, which means a majority of farmers have no access to online resources (World Bank, 2016). Further, more than one third of India’s adult rural population cannot read (NSSO, 2015).
Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT) launched Crop Specific Mobile Apps in 2014 as an 
e-agricultural extension service to provide a suite of stand-alone apps delivering 
material about best practices to low-literacy famers, in English, Hindi and four regional Indian languages: Kannada, Telugu, Marati and Gujarati. In addition to the agricultural software, the programme incorporates an ‘AgriPole’ hardware device that acts as a mobile hotspot to download agricultural content and other partner-endorsed material on the topics of health care, financial literacy and education services. As of August 2017, the suite of apps had reached 170,000 downloads through partnerships with government, private and non-governmental organizations.
Through the UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods 
in a Digital World, this case study is part of a series highlighting how inclusive digital solutions can help people with low skills or low literacy levels use technology in ways that support skills development and, ultimately, improve livelihoods – in contribution to achieving the Sustainable Development Goal on education. For more information go to en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative.ABOUT THIS  
CASE STUDYCase Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)3
Why selected
The Crop Specific Mobile Apps programme has evolved over time in 
response to changing user needs, in both content provided and the distribution mechanism. The recent analytics component shows how low-literacy users contribute to data collection to inform agricultural trends and predictions.
Key takeaways
1 /  The Crop Specific Mobile Apps programme uses an integrated 
business model which involves the sale of a proprietary hot spot device that facilitates access to the suite of apps, while generating additional revenue and sustainability through partner advertisements.
2 /  JAT’s cloud-based analytics platform extends the impact of the 
programme to mitigate against disease and pest emergence, identify knowledge gaps among farmers, and predict market trends in crop varieties.
3 / JAT recognizes that adapting digital technologies for agriculture 
requires implementation through devices with which farmers are already familiar, a user-friendly interface, and partnerships that are tightly aligned with a mutual vision.UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World4
Context and project origins
Working closely with farmers 
for some time, JAT has found 
that many farmers do not 
understand the appropriate 
methods for mixing chemical 
fertilizers or growth hormones, 
which require basic numeracy 
skills. Many farmers apply 
chemical fertilizers incorrectly, 
and the resulting crops are not 
fit for export. At the same time, 
erroneous of fertilizers can lead 
to a substantial deterioration in 
soil quality, which then adversely 
affects future harvests. In India, there are an estimated 120 million farm 
holdings (Mohan, 2015). While the government 
delivers agricultural extension services through 
the National Agricultural Research System (NARS), the entity is not sufficiently staffed to meet most of the demand across the country. 
According to a survey, fewer than 6 per cent of 
farmers reported receiving any support from extension agents (NSSO, 2005). Additional survey results revealed that only 40 per cent of 
farmers reported having access to any source of 
information on modern farming practices. Most of those individuals received information from 
other farmers or local agricultural input suppliers, 
for example, of fertilizer and seeds. (NSSO, 2005). 
Limitations in access to adequate farming 
information affect the agricultural industry along three dimensions: land preparation, cultivation 
and harvest. 
1Land preparation plays an important role in 
a successful harvest. The ability to choose the appropriate variety to cultivate in 
response to changes in climate conditions can have a drastic impact on crop output. If 
farmers are not able to distinguish between 
drought-resistant or disease-resistant varieties that are suited to various soil types, they run the risk of wasting limited 
resources. Many farmers in India and other 
developing countries who depend on agriculture do not know under which agro-climactic region they fall.
2Many hybrid crop varieties do not respond 
well to traditional methods of cultivation. However, farmers are largely unaware of the specific practices recommended by 
agricultural scientists for non-traditional 
varieties. Without access to industry information, farmers who have been growing a single crop for decades will 
continue to do so even if there is no market 
for the produce. Farmers may also be stuck in a monocrop culture because they do not know how to cultivate other types of crops. When disease and micronutrient deficiencies 
emerge during cultivation, farmers rely 
heavily on extension services and advice from outside experts, but these are accessible to only a small proportion of India’s farmer 
workforce.
3At the time of harvest and storage, a new 
set of preventable challenges emerges for farmers. Limited knowledge and application 
of inappropriate post-harvest techniques leads to a 16–20 per cent loss in produce (Hegazy, 2013). Customized information 
mechanisms could drastically reduce produce 
loss each year.Case Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)5
© Tukaram.Karve/Shutterstock.comDigital technologies can enhance the speed and 
quality of information that reaches agricultural 
workers when extension services have limited 
availability. Now that nearly 75 in every 100 inhabitants have mobile phones, there is a greatly improved potential for delivery of necessary 
information via phones where print material or 
online access is limited (UNSD, 2017). Through Crop Specific Mobile Apps, JAT seeks to bring information directly to farmers’ smartphones. The suite of more 
than 25 apps is updated regularly, and the apps 
offer evidenced-based information on sowing and transplantation methods, fertilization and dosage, 
pest management, irrigation and harvesting 
techniques (YourStory, 2015). The intentional emphasis on audio-visual support means that people with low literacy levels can access the material.While most existing technology solutions in agriculture focus on either market price or 
weather conditions, Crop Specific Mobile Apps 
combine a three-tier solution to provide farmers with agronomic-related content to help them improve their crop yield. The system incorporates 
a suite of apps on specific crop varieties and 
livestock management, a hardware device for storing and transferring data to smartphones through Bluetooth connectivity, and a cloud-
based analytics platform to monitor disease or 
pest emergence through usage data patterns. Farmers receive ongoing support through the 
apps to help them manage irrigation schedules, 
fertilizer and pesticide administration, and other routine activities such as livestock vaccination.Designing with the user 
6 UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World
© Jayalaxmi Agrotech/Anil KumarAs part of the content development process, JAT 
personnel use surveys, host community meetings, 
and undertake field visits. Staff are available to ensure 
an open line of communication with farmers who can call in to JAT offices to relay their experiences with the software and provide feedback. 
All the content in the apps is mapped to decision 
challenges farmers face in their daily agricultural practices. Throughout the development process, 
JAT emphasizes an uncomplicated design and 
straightforward content delivery. Informed by its community research activities, JAT identifies specific gaps in farmer knowledge and develops apps to 
help improve decision-making. Here are some 
examples:
Inaccurate soil selection. Many farmers are not aware 
which soils are most suitable for each crop variety. Therefore, JAT created an 
application providing information on common crop varieties and their ideal soil 
characteristics.
Wasteful fodder preservation. JAT field visits revealed 
that many farmers do not store their excess fodder efficiently to enhance its 
preservation. Therefore, they updated their fodder application to include a section 
on ‘silage production’ .
Poor connectivity. Many farmers in rural India do not have 
internet connectivity. Interestingly, despite low internet penetration, in 2017 
smartphone subscriptions are expected to represent around 30 per cent of all 
mobile subscriptions (Ericsson, 2017). One of the key drivers of this growth will be increased smartphone penetration in rural areas. As a result, the suite of apps was developed as lightweight, standalone files designed to work offline, and distributed via a non-traditional approach.
Inefficient timing of maintenance. Many farmers 
in India struggle to follow scheduled maintenance programmes for their crops 
and care of their livestock, leading to excessive waste and poor farming returns. 
Therefore, JAT incorporated various reminder mechanisms in their apps that adhere to best practices for routine maintenance. Farmers now receive timely prompts on topics ranging from irrigation and harvest schedules to ideal 
insemination periods and vaccination cycles for livestock.1
2
3
4Figure 1. JAT extension vehicleCase Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)7
In India, each state is divided into several agro-climatic 
regions. At the beginning of the design process, JAT took it 
for granted that farmers knew in which agro-climatic region 
they resided. Early release of the apps used references such as ‘Cotton variety ABC suitable for agro climatic region number 3’ . Many users did not in fact know which region they were in, 
and called into the JAT offices asking for further guidance. This 
feedback led to an update of the software to include a map of the various agro-climatic regions and details of the crop varieties suited to each one.INSIGHT
 
Software  
improvements  
through user  
feedbackCrop Specific Mobile Apps are developed to engage the farmers by providing extension 
support through the life of the crop cycle. For 
example, the Pomegranate app provides options to input the pruning and planting dates. The application then sends automated reminders to 
the farmer at specific intervals of the activities they 
need to follow to adhere to scientific cultivation practices. Further, each application offers simple, intuitive calculators to help the farmers use the 
right amount of fertilizer. This feature helps ensure 
that the farmers use sufficient fertilizer to produce optimal yields while protecting the soil from over-fertilization and therefore a build-up of potentially 
harmful chemicals.
Figure 2. Screenshots of the apps8 UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World
The digital solution
Crop Specific Mobile Apps offer a comprehensive 
digital approach for providing farmers with information 
they lack (Figure 3). The first component of the digital 
solution is a suite of mobile apps dedicated to specific crops. Each application is filled with audio-visuals to improve their suitability for farmers with low reading 
proficiency. Each application has been developed in 
English and local languages, and is fully accessible offline once it has been downloaded.
A second component of the digital solution is the 
AgriPole hardware device (Figure 4). AgriPole serves as a portable hotspot tower that stores and transmits data to smartphones via Bluetooth, so the system can function 
when there is no internet connectivity. The entire suite 
of crop specific apps is available through the device and downloadable by any farmer with a smartphone. 
AgriPole devices are typically installed in places that 
farmers visit frequently (municipal offices, rural banks, temples and farmer produce organizations). The device is installed with a display board 
listing the download instructions in the local 
language (Figure 4).
The third component of the project is a 
back-end analytics platform. As farmers 
begin downloading crop specific apps, usage statistics are stored on their devices and automatically pushed to JAT’s cloud servers 
once the devices are connected to them. JAT 
then uses this data to track and analyse trends in disease and pest-related information based on the farmers’ browsing patterns. Given the 
broad user base of Crop Specific Mobile Apps, 
the analytics platform has the potential to assist policy-makers and government officials 
to make informed decisions about their 
agricultural support services. 
Figure 3. Crop Specific Mobile Apps offer a comprehensive solution 
to farmers for improved agricultural practicesFigure 4. Agripole device on display with instructionsUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World9
Monitoring and evaluation strategy
The Crop Specific Mobile Apps platform uses big 
data to provide localized solutions for agricultural 
extension services. The analytics platform applies 
a dynamic measurement system to track the farmers’ usage pattern for the apps. Items such as the name and contact information of the 
user, the specific information on crop varieties 
downloaded and geographic positioning are collected each time the apps are accessed. A built-in algorithm monitors usage patterns across 
all users, and data is stored on a secured cloud 
server. If the farmer is without connectivity, data is sent to the cloud server via SMS each month.As farmers browse the apps, JAT tracks the usage patterns from the cloud servers. For instance, sudden 
spikes in searches for information about diseases 
or pests in specific crop varieties by region could indicate the emergence of an outbreak of a particular disease or a pest (Figure 5). In these situations, JAT 
contacts a few farmers from the region(s) of interest 
to check whether this is the case. The analytics platform also correlates the user data with supporting statistics such as weather patterns and rainfall levels. 
Once it is confirmed that there is an outbreak of a 
disease or pest, JAT alerts the registered farmers in the adjacent regions through SMS push notifications.
Figure 5. Screenshot of JAT analytics platform for disease analysis of bananasCase Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)10
Output from the cloud-based analytics platform has produced 
important insights into pest detection, crop diversification needs and 
regional crop trends.
Pest detection.  93 per cent of farmers using the Arecanut 
app in Karwar and Dakshina districts accessed the ‘Root Grub’ content more than six times during a given month, with the highest levels 
of access during periods of rainfall. This implied that they were experiencing an outbreak of the root grub pest, and prompted further 
action. 
Crop diversification needs.  96 per cent of farmers 
in the districts of Gokak, Athani, Raibag and Bilahongala in south India are only accessing content on one crop, sugarcane. This data 
underscores the need for a campaign to ensure they are aware what other crops could be grown successfully in their districts.
Regional crop trends.  Usage data from thousands 
of farmers outside of the costal and southern districts of India 
accessed information about maize, which coincided with a delay in 
the onset of the monsoon season. This data suggested a potential shift from cultivation of current crops towards maize to cope with the unexpectedly dry conditions. When an emerging trend such as crop 
shift is identified from content access data, local farmers and agricultural 
institutions are contacted to check that the conclusions drawn are justified before any further action is taken.RESULT
 
Using big data  
for localized 
solutionsJAT uses surveys to check to what extent farmers use the information they obtain through the apps and modify their behaviour appropriately. Samples of farmers are 
questioned to identify changes in input cost, productivity and fertilizer use before and 
after use of the system.  The ability to reach marginalized and remote communities is measured by the frequency of downloads from the AgriPole device in each community. User satisfaction is also constantly monitored through application ratings, user reviews, 
and direct feedback provided through focus groups and farmers visiting JAT offices.
Beyond usability and impact data, JAT is interested in tracking its own progress on the 
extent of the support it is providing, determined as a function of the number of crop 
apps available for download, number of languages supported, and number of AgriPole 
devices distributed. Case Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)11
Results to date
© Jayalaxmi Agrotech/Anil KumarUp to Quarter 3 of 2017, the Crop 
Specific Mobile Apps had been downloaded over 170,000 times, which represents a considerable amount of information provided to farmers, many of whom had not previously received this type of information because of their low literacy levels and lack of access to the internet. 
RESULT  
Advancing crop 
diversificationBelgaum district is in Karnataka state, in southern India. 
Farmers there have been growing mostly sugar cane for 
several decades. In recent years, the prices they receive for 
sugar cane have dropped substantially. However, farmers in Belgaum struggled to shift their agricultural practice because they did not know what alternative crops they 
might grow successfully, or the practices involved with 
their cultivation. In 2014 and 2015 the JAT extension team visited almost 180 villages across the district as part of a campaign to promote the Crop Specific Mobile Apps. 
During a follow-up visit in 2017, the extension workers 
reported that many farmers who were using the apps had shifted to other crop varieties because of the information 
provided through the digital solution.Figure 6. 
Farmer using the Crop Specific Mobile Apps platformUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World12
Sustainability and future plans
JAT started small in rural Karnataka and gradually grew across 
the state in order to limit the impact of potential failure. Once 
the model was sufficiently validated, JAT started to expand 
to other states, including Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Orisa, Uttarkhand and Jharkhand. Beyond India, some African countries have shown an interest in using the 
model, and Green Way in Myanmar recently entered into a 
partnership with JAT to replicate the intervention in Asia.
JAT views product development and innovation as an 
ongoing process. It is continuing to update the existing 
platform as its user base grows, both in geographical spread and in density, which is enabled through increased smartphone and internet penetration. However, the group is 
committed to tackling only a limited range of the problems 
that farmers face. It believes it is important to keep within its capacity instead of trying to resolve every issue farmers face 
and risking overcomplicating the platform.Currently, JAT is experimenting with 
an agri e-commerce platform which 
was launched at the end of 2016. The 
platform is intended to serve as a direct link between bulk buyers of specific crop produce and farmers. Since the system 
retains information on farmers and the 
specific crop varieties they are growing, or considering growing, it is a potentially useful resource for buyers. By serving as a 
bilateral database for buyers and farmers 
it could effectively cut out intermediaries and enable farmers to obtain better profits 
while selling their produce at lower prices. 
Before this platform can be expanded beyond the pilot phase, JAT’s priority is to ensure that the basic farmer information 
gap is sufficiently addressed.
LESSON  
Adaptive 
implementation 
strategyThroughout its journey in developing this system, JAT has continued 
to adapt its business model and implementation approach. During 
the pilot stages, it worked on a charge-per-download model. JAT 
staff would attend agricultural events and sell the apps to farmers in person. This transactional model proved to create a bottleneck, and JAT then moved to a free download model. The number of app 
downloads increased significantly as a result. Generally, a handful 
of farmers in a village would become early adopters of the service, and others in the community followed their example. Based on user feedback from the early trials, JAT continuously updated the 
apps by adding features such as the fertilizer calculator and an 
expense tracker. JAT has since developed a way to contribute to the sustainability of the programme by selling its data analytics 
to suppliers, and selling the AgriPole devices and advertisements 
through partnerships.Case Study: Crop Specific Mobile Apps by Jayalaxmi Agro Tech (JAT)13
Lessons learned and recommendations
JAT has confronted several challenges throughout the product life cycle. Below is a summary of some 
of the issues it encountered and how it applied a user-centred design to move the project forward.
Product design.  Although hardware is 
an essential part of the system, creating software 
that is simple and intuitive to use was the biggest 
challenge for JAT. The research and development process involved extensive ideation, field-testing, and focus groups with local partners.
Content development.  Producing 
an application for each crop is time-consuming and requires many iterations. Some advanced features were removed after specific apps had been developed because the feedback from 
farmers was that they were complex to use. For 
example, many of the apps include a fertilizer calculator, and this could have incorporated many additional parameters. However, many of the users 
have limited numeracy skills, so JAT opted to keep 
the feature simple and straightforward. Diversity in farmers’ requirements also presents a major challenge for content development. Crop varieties 
that are relevant to one region might not be 
relevant elsewhere. This regional diversity led JAT to decide to develop separate apps for each crop variety, instead of housing all of the content for an 
entire crop in a single application.
Reaching the unreached. 
Download capacity is another challenge owing 
to the poor internet connectivity in rural areas. 
Even when there is connectivity, farmers can find 
it difficult to download the apps from the online stores because they need to identify the most appropriate out of a vast array of content available. 
The AgriPole was developed to overcome these 
challenges by providing a simple to use repository to allow direct access to the mobile farming apps. The decision to create individual apps for specific crop varieties ensured that file sizes remain low, 
which further facilitates downloading.Defining a distribution 
strategy . There is no standard approach for 
implementation as the farmers’ contexts vary from 
region to region. Initially JAT tried visiting individual 
villages to disseminate the apps to farmers, but the costs proved prohibitive. Gradually the marketing and distribution activities evolved into campaigns 
at places where farmers typically gather. The 
outreach campaign has since transitioned further, and is now focused on the AgriPole devices and the locations where they are installed.
Overcoming the pilot 
syndrome. Many agricultural digital 
solutions in India do not advance beyond the pilot 
stage of implementation. In most of the cases, only 
limited funds are available, and it is challenging to generate enough revenue to fund expansion. JAT was able to overcome this problem by testing and improving on a variety of business models.
Technology adoption.  The use 
of technology is not always linked to behavioural 
change. The lesson was learned from early 
experiences that it is important to ensure that the system does prompt behavioural change, which is effectively achieved through partnerships. These 
need to be tightly integrated, with a mutual vision 
and mission that focuses on achieving the intended behavioural changes. 
Stay mission-driven.  Sometimes 
stakeholders request solutions that apply more 
advanced technologies. However, JAT recognizes 
that more complex problems cannot be addressed without first providing a solution for the basic issue, namely the information gap. UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World14
Contact information
 
Jayalaxmi Agro Tech Private Limited is a social enterprise that aims to leverage digital solutions to improve  
farming practices.
References
 
Belakeri, P ., Satyanarayan, K., Jagadeeswary, V., Yathiraj, S., Veeranna, K. C. and Rajeshwari, Y. B. 2017. Effectiveness of mobile 
app on fodder production in terms of knowledge gain among livestock farmers of Karnataka. Indian Research Journal of 
Extension Education, January, pp. 1–15.
Ericsson. 2017. Ericsson Mobility Report 2017. https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/mobility-report/documents/2017/
ericsson-mobility-report-june-2017-rina.pdf (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
Hegazy, R. 2013. Post-Harvest Situation and Losses in India. www.researchgate.net/publication/301770292_Post-harvest_
Situation_and_Losses_in_India (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
Mohan, J. 2015. Importance of mobile dissemination of agricultural information among Indian farmers. International Journal 
of Emerging Technologies in Computational and Applied Sciences, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 75–9. http://iasir.net/IJETCASpapers/
IJETCAS15-755.pdf (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
NSSO (National Sample Survey Organisation). 2005. Key Indicators of Situation of Agricultural Households in India, 70th Round. 
New Delhi: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
––––. 2015. Key Indicators of Social Consumption: Education in India, 71st Round. New Delhi: Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. www.icssrdataservice.in/datarepository/index.php/catalog/14/download/242 (Accessed 10 
August 2017.)
Sajesh, V. K. and Suresh, A. 2016. Public sector agricultural extension in India: a note. Review of Agrarian Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1). 
www.ras.org.in/public_sector_agricultural_extension_in_india (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2017. India Country Profile. http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=INDIA  
(Accessed 10 August 2017.)Veerendra, P . M. 2015. A mobile app that provides complete information on 15 crops. The Hindu, 5 October. www.thehindu.
com/news/national/karnataka/mobile-app-that-provides-complete-information-on-15-crops/article7724921.ece (Accessed 
10 August 2017.)
World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington DC: World Bank. http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/896971468194972881/pdf/102725-PUB-Replacement-PUBLIC.pdf (Accessed 10 August 2017.)YourStory. 2015. Agrotech app from a Ballari-based company helps farmers minimize crop loss and improve yields.  
Team YS, 26 December. https://yourstory.com/2015/12/intel-ifdic-jayalaxmi-agrotech/  
 (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
www.jayalaxmiagrotech.com info@jayalaxmiagrotech.com
This case study was commissioned by UNESCO and Pearson as part of the UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for 
Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World. The views and opinions expressed in this case study are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Authors: Nathan M. Castillo, Education Consultant, and Steven Vosloo, Section of Youth, Literacy and Skills 
Development, Education Sector, UNESCO.
UNESCO is grateful to Jayalaxmi Agro Tech for their support in developing this case study.Stay in touch
en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative
www.projectliteracy.comICTliteracy@unesco.org
UNESCO Education Sector
Education is UNESCO’s top priority because it is a basic 
human right and the foundation on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through education with a special focus on gender equality and Africa.
About Pearson 
Pearson is a digital education company, with expertise in 
educational courseware and assessment, and a range of teaching and learning services powered by technology. 
Our mission is to help people make progress through 
access to better learning. We believe that learning opens up opportunities, creating fulfilling careers and better lives. The Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized agency 
for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides 
guidance for the implementation of this ambitious goal 
and commitments.
About Project Literacy 
Project Literacy is a global campaign founded and 
convened by Pearson to make significant and sustainable advances in the fight against illiteracy so that all people - 
regardless of geography, language, race, class, or gender 
– have the opportunity to fulfill their potential through the power of words. 
