ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
© O. Ye. Kaminskyi, Y. O. Yereshko, S. O. Kyrychenk o, 2018.          128  UDC 378.09:004+334.7 
Oleg Ye. Kaminskyi 
PhD, Associate Professor, Associate Professor of th e Department of Information Management 
Kyiv National Economic University named after Vadym  Hetman, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID 0000-0003-0607-8944 
olkam@kneu.edu.ua 
Yulia O. Yereshko 
PhD, Associate Professor, Associate Professor of th e Department of Theoretic and Applied Economics 
National Technical University of Ukraine “Igor Siko rsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute”, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-9161-8820 
julia.jereshko@gmail.com  
Sergii O. Kyrychenko 
PhD, Associate Professor of the Department of Econo mics and Entrepreneurship  
National Technical University of Ukraine “Igor Siko rsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute”, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID 0000-0001-6195-5204 
serg191@ukr.net 
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IN U KRAINE: 
TRAJECTORIES OF DEVELOPMENT IN THE CONDITIONS OF NE W 
TECHNOLOGICAL AND ECONOMIC ORDER 
Abstract.  The article substantiates the role of the digital transformation of higher education in 
Ukraine in the era of the fourth industrial revolut ion. There was proven the need to develop the 
strategy of the university education digital transf ormation, as well as the formation of new 
information and communication competencies. Accordi ng to the authors, the strategy of digital 
transformation of the university education system h as to include the modernization of corporate IT 
architecture management, which should be implemente d as a cloud-based platform. The authors 
analysed the main possible directions of the educat ional services transformation and the 
accompanying business processes. The use of blockch ain technology for the educational content 
management module construction is proposed. The int egration of the educational content 
management modules of different Ukrainian universit ies should become the basis for creating a 
global cloud-based platform for higher education.  
Keywords: information technologies; cloud computing; digital transformation; higher education; 
corporate architecture; blockchain; digital economy ; innovative development . 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Problem statement. Over the past several years, digital transformation  has become one 
of the main trends, both in industry and in the pub lic sector of many countries. Digital 
transformation determines the transition to a massi ve use of digital technologies in the variety 
of sectors of the economy and society, which improv e or replace traditional products and 
services. According to the World Economic Forum [1] , digital transformation offers 
enormous potential for innovation at a rate of seve ral trillion dollars and applies to many 
industries (e.g., logistics, healthcare, automotive  industry) and social trends (e.g., science, 
government, etc.). The digital transformation of so ciety not only significantly alters industrial 
and economic structures, but also introduces new es sences in civil, business, state and 
interstate turnover. 
Ukraine's Digital Agenda 2020 states that the rapid  and profound consequences of the 
transition to a "digital" will only be possible if digital transformation becomes the basis for 
the life of Ukrainian society, business and governm ent institutions, the commonplace and ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
129 everyday phenomenon, our DNA, our key goal on the p ath to prosperity, the basis of 
prosperity of Ukraine [2].  
One of the areas that have enormous potential for d igital transformation is the higher 
education system, especially the system of universi ty education. University education requires 
the development of a strategy for digital transform ation, and the formation of new information 
and communication competencies. However, the use of  digital technologies in the Ukrainian 
universities is often limited to the creation of mu ltimedia content for lectures and the opening 
of the access to distance education platforms deplo yed on the Internet. We believe that the 
strategy of digital transformation of the universit y education system should have a broader 
focus and has to include the modernization of corpo rate IT architecture management, which 
could provide an important contribution to structur ing the efforts of innovation in education. 
Cloud-based university platforms can play an import ant role in the implementation of the 
Ukrainian education digital transformation and the modernization of traditional educational 
services. Everything mentioned above indicates the relevance of the chosen topic and outlines 
the range of issues that require a thorough scienti fic research. 
Analysis of recent research and publications. The theoretical and practical aspects of 
the digital transformation of society and the syste m of higher education, in particular, are 
covered in the works of such authors as S. Berman, R. Bell [3], M. Wißotzki, K. Sandkuhl 
[4], A. Kuntzman [5], N. Rozanova, A. Yushyn [6], G . Karcheva [7], S. Veretiuk [8] etc. 
The main directions of the influence of digital tra nsformation on the evolution of social 
and economic systems are:  
− increasing mobility in satisfying the needs of cons umers, allowing to overcome the 
territorial restrictions and dependence on the loca tion of service providers [5]; 
− obtaining the possibility of collecting, storing an d processing large volumes of 
information, which leads to a reduction of transact ion costs in decision-making and 
concluding transactions; 
− proliferation of network effects [6], that change t he chains of generating profits and 
underlie new business models; 
− changing the system of relations between consumers and service providers towards 
the involvement of consumers in the process of crea ting a new consumer value, for 
example, under the concept of "open innovation" [6] . 
However, existing studies do not fully take into ac count the peculiarities of the creation 
and modernization of corporate IT architecture of u niversities, as well as the emergence and 
development of cloud-based university platforms tha t can play an important role in the 
process of digital transformation of Ukrainian educ ation and modernization of the traditional 
system of educational services of universities. 
The purpose of the article is to study the features and define the main criter ia for the 
university education system digital transformation in the context of transition of the domestic 
socio-economic system to the innovative nature of d evelopment. 
2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The research is based on the use of general scienti fic and theoretical methods: analysis 
and synthesis of scientific, technical and pedagogi cal literature concerning the digital 
transformation of society and its impact on the sys tem of higher education; the combination of 
theories and conclusions from various fields of res earch. The paper uses argumentative-
deductive, inductive and systematic approaches. 
 ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
130 3. RESEARCH RESULTS 
According to the World Bank, the digital economy is  a system of economic, social and 
cultural relations based on the use of digital info rmation and communication technologies. 
The widespread proliferation of digital technologie s, their penetration into basically all 
spheres of human life and society is reflected in t he concept of digital transformation. In the 
era of the fourth industrial revolution, the most i mportant factor – the factor of access to 
advanced technologies – was added to traditional ad vantages in the form of inclusive 
institutions and strong leaders. The technological explosion leads to qualitative changes in 
business and management [6]. 
In many industries, products and services are tradi tionally supplied on the basis of 
physical infrastructure (for example, shops, bankin g offices, service centres, universities) or 
individuals (for example, dealers, brokers, academi cs, lecturers). Often, products or services 
are also physically displayed, and operational proc esses use physical support. In this context, 
digital transformation determines the transition fr om traditional creation and sales of services 
to clients, including related operational procedure s, to the use of digital technologies to 
enhance or replace traditional services with digita l ones. 
The basis of modern digital enterprises will be the  technology of the so-called third 
platform: cloud computing, mobile services, "brainf acturing", i.e., intellectual production, big 
data, the concept of IoT (Internet of Things) and s ocial networks. 
For the further analysis of the directions of digit al transformation, authors used the 
structural approach proposed in the study [4]. This  approach addresses two aspects of digital 
transformation: the transformation of products and services offered by organizations and the 
transformation of business processes for the provis ion of these products, in both aspects, they 
are distinguished by three stages. In the aspect of  transformation of products and services, the 
following stages are distinguished: improvement (ad ding additional services), expansion 
(adding new features of existing products or servic es through digital components), and 
redefining (creating new products or services that replace the previous ones). In the aspect of 
business processes, the stages are as follows: crea tion (the emergence of new business 
processes on the basis of IT), leverage (the emerge nce of new opportunities to achieve greater 
efficiency of business processes) and integration ( the combination of new and traditional 
business processes into a single infrastructure). 
Assuming that the overall goal of digital transform ations in the system of higher 
education is the transformation of educational serv ices and the accompanying business 
processes, there are three different possible direc tions that need to be analysed: 
− transformation and redefinition of educational serv ices to match the changes in the 
system of business processes of the university; 
− transformation of business processes aimed at creat ing new and improving the 
existing IT-based business processes as the basis f or further analysis and 
transformation of educational services; 
− combining the first and second directions in order to integrate the simultaneous 
transformation in both directions. 
The first direction mainly requires digitization of  all major and most of the auxiliary 
educational services. Creating profits in higher ed ucation institutions is primarily related to 
the educational process and students (i.e. universi ty admission, the choice of curricula and 
courses, the results of examinations, etc.), as wel l as the development of curricula and 
programs and ensuring their quality. Supporting edu cational services include: financial 
management, training planning, academic training sc heduling and many other functions. In 
general, this normally requires creation or impleme ntation of an integrated management ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
131 system for higher education, including support for mobile workers and asset management of 
the organization. 
The University, as a provider of educational servic es, should first focus on creating new 
services and converting existing services into digi tal ones. An integral part of this process is 
the opening of implemented curricula for access out side the higher education institution at the 
national and international levels. Usually, this in volves the creation of digital educational 
content and the provision of digital interaction an d collaboration between students and faculty 
as well as students between themselves. Internation alization of services also requires 
adaptation while using the different languages. In addition, most traditional educational 
programs should be distributed to lower-level progr ammes, for example, instead of four-year 
curricula for shorter individual certification prog rams, or instead of six ECTS training 
modules, smaller, but combined modules. Such a divi sion will allow the sale of services to a 
wider audience and increase their flexibility. 
In the case of a combination of two directions, the ir systematic interconnection is 
established. For example, it may be the creation of  a new group at the university to conduct 
research on a grant, in a combination with the digi tal transformation of business processes 
related to a new direction or field of research and  the financing of its work. The results of the 
analysis of competitive advantages and means of dig ital transformation implementation in the 
system of university education, carried out by the authors, are shown in Fig.1. 
Creating the 
conditions for joint 
work, improving the 
quality of 
communication 
"student-faculty"
University 
business processes 
automation  
Cloud-oriented 
platforms 
development 
Scientific research 
development The quality of 
education 
improvement 
Quick market 
access of 
educational and 
scientific products 
Development of 
information and 
communication 
competencies Educational Content Management 
System (multimedia materials, 
software applications)
BigData analysis module 
Business intelligence and data 
visualization service 
Module for users interaction and 
work organization 
Customer Relationship Management 
Module Alterations Advantages Implementation Technologies 
 
Fig. 1. Implementation of digital transformation in  higher education institutions  
An analysis of the impact of digital transformation  on the University's IT architecture 
makes it possible to draw the following conclusions : 
• The university business process system requires t he creation of a directory of 
administrative services for the training process an d internal research, personnel management, 
infrastructure management and other support service s. Also, it is necessary to take into ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
132 account all stages of the student's life cycle in t he system of business processes (from 
admission to university to graduation).  
− The software application architecture requires the creation of an integrated student 
life cycle management system, the integration of ad ministrative information systems 
with systems of planning and management of curricul a and modules, databases of 
scientific data and library repositories. The best way to implement such a system is to 
create a cloud-based platform for the university. 
− The data architecture requires the creation of a pu blicly available data model with the 
opportunities for exchange between the universities  (for example, for managing the 
student life cycle, for administrative purposes, fo r content of lectures, etc.). In 
modern conditions, educational materials are alread y created in the form of 
multimedia, digital content, but often are not inte grated with administrative data. 
− Technology architecture in the context of digital t ransformation requires the creation 
of a centralized IT infrastructure of the universit y established on a cloud-based 
platform with additional separate platforms for tec hnology parks and research units 
[10]. 
The largest change is needed in the architecture of  software applications, which should 
be implemented as a new cloud-based platform for th e delivery of innovative scientific 
products and educational services. This can be impl emented through collaborative cloud-
based support in the divided student groups that ca nnot attend classes in university buildings 
and are geographically distributed. The digital tra nsformation process will also be affected by 
the business processes: for example, the formalizat ion of the online exams procedure and the 
development of modified work processes for issuing the diplomas, certificates, etc. However, 
most of the traditional university management funct ions should remain stable. In the data 
architecture, one of the important transformations will be the more intensive use of digital 
content and the integration of different types of d ata with administrative databases and student 
registers. 
The digital transformation process focuses on the d igitization of all revenue-generating 
processes and supporting business processes that af fect the business from the point of view of 
IT architecture of the university. For a business p rocess system, the implementation of digital 
processes and their optimization is just one of the  issues that needs to be addressed. 
Adaptation of the university organizational structu re to change in the business processes, 
creation of new organizational units for online edu cational programs or conducting the 
certified courses are equally important.  
For the combined directions of digital transformati on, the alteration of services and 
business processes is initially performed on the ba sis of separate units or clearly defined 
individual institutions. An example is the beginnin g of a digital transformation of only the 
Master's training system or the modification of int ernationally oriented training programmes. 
There is also the possibility of new training forma ts, such as short curricula (up to one 
semester) for mixed target groups, in the form of a  combination of traditional study and online 
learning. 
Based on the results of the analysis, we can conclu de that the educational content 
management system can serve as an integration point  for the implementation of the digital 
transformation strategy. New target groups of stude nts and educational services formats 
require adapted support for learning management sys tems in comparison with the traditional 
student groups, since the teaching and tuition conc epts and materials will be different from 
the traditional ones. The authors believe that, in order to facilitate this adaptation, the 
University's educational content management system should be flexibly adapted to the 
student's individual needs, and integrate existing and future learning process essentials and ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
133 tools that support different phases of learning. Su ch a module for managing the educational 
content of the university platform is presented in Fig. 2.: 
Users 
registration 
Work on 
tasks in 
groups 
Sending 
tasks, closing 
workgroups 
University 
Search Engine 
Distance 
Learning System 
Task Planning 
and Scheduling 
System Educational 
process    Technical 
resources 
User Groups:
- Students 
- Faculty 
- Scholars 
- Mentors 
University 
administration:
- Training format 
- Curricula 
- Training rules 
- The Ethical Code 
- The decisions of 
academic councils 
Distribution 
of tasks 
Workgroups 
creation 
Educational 
Content 
Management 
System 
Group of 
Communication 
Software 
Applications 
 
Fig. 2. The block diagram of the educational conten t management module of the university 
The module combines various functions and cloud ser vices in a single UI, and consists 
of the following set of services: 
− University Search Engine - provides a unified user interface for searching all training 
databases, repositories and databases of research p latforms of technology parks using 
ontologies and related technologies of Semantic Web . Based on the student's profile 
(that is, on the basis of their training format, in tegration into working groups and 
personal data), the priorities of search in databas es, which are considered by the 
system to be most important for the accomplished ta sks, are determined. 
− Task Planning and Scheduling System: includes train ing support systems at various 
courses, audience distribution and e-scheduling, ed ucational planning and provision 
of individual information. These systems are integr ated into one interface and 
combined by a single data flow. 
− a Group of Communication Software Applications incl udes synchronous (i.e. Skype) 
and asynchronous communication, document sharing, c ollaborative document editing 
and group task explanation. ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
134 − Educational Content Management System integrates cu rriculum managers and 
training courses (video collections, digital manual s, guides, media content etc.). 
The above list shows that the educational content m anagement module facilitates the 
integration of various cloud services, which, in tu rn, are the part of the digital transformation 
of university education. Moreover, the implementati on of this module facilitates the 
synchronization of information flows and the integr ation of business processes.  
The script for using this module starts with the st udent's login to the system. The student 
is provided with a personalized web page with relev ant materials and courses for his or her 
tutoring process. After completing the training sta ges, performing various modules as part of 
the training format, the student starts downloading  a specific module that reflects the current 
state of their training. When receiving the latest results, the student is faced with various tasks 
that need to be performed within the module, but th ey have the option of a free choice of tasks 
to perform. The module includes an informational an alysis of the student's work, providing 
relevant multimedia materials for research, includi ng the access to a big data analysis system. 
Also, the tasks involve communication with other st udents if they are assigned to a 
workgroup or joint research. All student activities  must be documented and carried out within 
individual schedules and working hours, as well as meet specific interests and responsibilities 
within the scope of the task. Any transaction compl eted by a student is recorded in a public 
accounting book and is the subject to verification and on-going analysis. For the construction 
of an educational content management module, we pro pose to use the blockchain technology. 
The blockchain technology is implemented in the for m of a distributed database, which stores 
data packed in special cryptographically separated blocks in chronological order. New blocks 
are added to the end of the database, and each new block contains a link (the so-called hash 
value) to the contents of the previous one. [11]. T he block content can be predefined or 
randomly generated by users of the module. The publ ic key data encryption method is used to 
ensure the security and reliability of the content of the distributed database. 
The blockchain technology, by integrating the educa tional content management 
modules of different Ukrainian universities, will e nsure the creation of a unified, safe and 
transparent platform for developing a global cloud- based platform for higher education 
systems. We can distinguish three main advantages o f such project: 
− First, it is the content exchange. Academic staff a nd scholars share ideas and upload 
their tutoring materials to the cloud so others can  use them freely; 
− Secondly, it is the emergence of content-based inno vation, where tutors co-operate 
on interdisciplinary and inter-university projects to jointly create new teaching 
materials using global databases and other tools; 
− Thirdly, universities and colleges become part of a  global network of lecturers, 
students and educational institutions learning toge ther in the framework of a general 
cloud-based platform, nevertheless retaining their identity, financial policy and 
brand.  
The integration of the academic and technological e nvironment, emergence of new 
mixed forms of learning, early career guidance in t he latest industries are only a part of the 
trends determining the future of education. Much of  the breakthrough decisions in this area 
are realized not by traditional academic institutio ns, but rather by new players in the 
education market: financial and technological compa nies, academic associations, and bright 
private initiatives. A new transnational market is emerging and it can quickly become a major 
competitor against the traditional educational inst itutions, reformat the educational markets 
and set new rules for them. 
 ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
135 4. CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS FOR FURTHER STUDIES 
The conducted investigation of society digital tran sformation in the context of the 
university education system digitalization, as well  as the analysis of the ways for the general 
transformation and modification of university IT in frastructures brings us to a conclusion that 
corporate IT architecture of higher educational est ablishments is the basis for the digital 
transformation of the entire higher education syste m of Ukraine.  
The basic components of the digital economy, which are developing through its 
digitization, currently include: infrastructure, el ectronic business operations and e-commerce. 
Digital transformation is the significant factor in  technological evolution, which allows 
service providers to overcome the territorial const raints, reduce transaction costs for decision 
making and bargaining, and develop new business mod els based on networking effects. 
The analysis of the digital transformation impact o n the university IT architecture 
showed that digital technologies enhance the tenden cy of education system service delivery, 
creating the preconditions for the development of n ew business models of educational 
services. The IT architecture of a modern universit y should be implemented as a new cloud-
based platform delivering the innovative science pr oducts and educational services, including 
digital competence portfolios and educational navig ators. The platform will also provide 
personalized additional training using mobile track ing devices. 
The main problems of the education system digital t ransformation are associated with 
the difficulties of merging the various technical s olutions, the need for security in terms of the 
confidential information disposition, as well as th e risk of imposing poor-quality educational 
content. In order to solve the above problems, the authors propose to create a single 
information space for the digital interaction of un iversities on the basis of a convergent cloud-
oriented platform of the entire education system of  Ukraine. 
We propose the concept of the educational content m anagement module construction 
for the university platform based on the blockchain  technology, which promotes the 
integration of various cloud educational services, and its creation is the part of the digital 
transformation of university education. 
Further research should include a step-by-step anal ysis of transformational measures 
and analysis of all layers of IT architecture of hi gher education institutions, including the 
calculation of the economic effect of digital trans formation at all its levels. It is also necessary 
to investigate the digital transformation of other organizations of secondary and vocational 
education in order to involve them in the construct ion of a single meta-university platform. 
Over the next two decades, new technologies and dig italisation processes will generally 
change the approach to education, and we need to ta ke measures today to prepare for these 
changes. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  World Economic Forum. (2016) Digital Transformation of Industries: Digital Enter prise.  [online] 
Available at:  http://reports.weforum.org/digital-
transformation/wpcontent/blogs.dir/94/mp/files/page s/files/digital-enterprise- narrative-final-january -
2016.pdf [Accessed 04 Feb. 2018] (in English). 
[2]  imzo.gov.ua. (2017)  Digitalization of Ukraine's education in action  [online] Available at: 
https://imzo.gov.ua/2017/11/01/tsyfrovizatsiya-osvi ty-ukrajiny-v-diji/  [Accessed 04 Feb. 2018] (in 
Ukrainian). 
[3]  Berman, S. J. and Bell, R. (2011) Digital transform ation: Creating new business models where digital 
meets physical. IBM Institute for Business Value , pp. 1-17 (in English). 
[4]  Wißotzki, M. and Sandkuhl, K. (2015) Elements and C haracteristics of Enterprise Architecture 
Capabilities. 14th International Conference BIR 2015, Tartu, Esto nia, August 26-28, 2015 , pp. 82-96 (in 
English). ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
136 [5]  Kuntzman, A. (2016) Transformation of the internal and external business environment in the digital 
economy. Management of economic systems: electronic scientif ic journal (2016 (11 (93) , p. 1 (in 
Russian). 
[6]  Rozanova, N. Yushyn, A. (2015) The mechanism of tra nsformation of the network market in the digital 
age. Terra Economicus  13 (1), pp. 73-88 (in Russian). 
[7]  Karcheva, G. (2017) The digital economy and its imp act on the development of national and internationa l 
economics. Financial space  (3 (27). [online] Available at:  
https://fp.cibs.ubs.edu.ua/files/1703/17kgttme.pdf [Accessed 04 Feb. 2018] (in Ukrainian). 
[8]  Karcheva, G. and Karcheva, I. (2017) Improving educ ation in a digital economy. Problems of ensuring 
the effective functioning and stable development of  the banking system and economy. Materials of the V ІІ 
All-Ukrainian Scientific and Practical Conference. - Kiev - May 19, 2017,  pp. 320-322 (in Ukrainian). 
[9]  Veretiuk, S. and Pilinskyi, V. (2017) Determination  of the priority directions of the digital economy 
development in Ukraine. Scientific notes of the Ukrainian Research Institut e of Communications (2016 
(2), pp. 51-58 (in Ukrainian). 
[10]  Kaminsky, O., Yereshko, Y. and Kyrychenko, S. (2017 ) Cloud platform of the modern Ukrainian 
university as the prerequisite of transition to the  innovative model of economic development. Information 
Technologies and Learning Tools , 61 (5). [online] Available at: 
https://journal.iitta.gov.ua/index.php/itlt/article / download/1862/1257 [Accessed 04 Feb. 2018] (in 
Ukrainian). 
[11]  Sleiman, M. D., Lauf, A.P. and Yampolskiy, R. (2015 ) Bitcoin Message: Data Insertion on a Proof-of-
Work Cryptocurrency System. International Conference on Cyberworlds (CW). IEEE , pp. 332–336. 
[online] Available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/l pdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=7398436 
[Accessed 04 Feb. 2018] (in English). 
[12]  Tulchynska, S. (2009) Intellectual and Innovative Modernization of the Uk rainian Economy: Theoretical 
and Methodological Aspects. Kyiv: NTUU "KPI", p. 354 (in Ukrainian). 
The material was received by the editorial board on  07.02.2018  
ЦИФРОВА  ТРАНСФОРМАЦІЯ  УНІВЕРСИТЕТСЬКОЇ  ОСВІТИ  В УКРАЇНІ : 
ТРАЄКТОРІЇ  РОЗВИТКУ  В УМОВАХ  НОВІТНЬОГО  ТЕХНІКО -
ЕКОНОМІЧНОГО  УКЛАДУ   
Камінський  Олег  Євгенович  
кандидат  економічних  наук , доцент , доцент  кафедри  інформаційного  менеджменту  
Київський  національний  економічний  університет  імені  Вадима  Гетьмана , м. Київ , Україна  
ORCID ID 0000-0003-0607-8944 
olkam@kneu.edu.ua 
Єрешко  Юлія  Олександрівна  
кандидат  економічних  наук , доцент , доцент  кафедри  теоретичної  та  прикладної  економіки  
НТУ  України  “ Київський  політехнічний  інститут  імені  Ігоря  Сікорського ”, м. Київ , Україна  
ORCID ID 0000-0002-9161-8820 
julia.jereshko@gmail.com  
Кириченко  Сергій  Олександрович  
кандидат  економічних  наук , доцент  кафедри  економіки  і підприємництва  
НТУ  України  “ Київський  політехнічний  інститут  імені  Ігоря  Сікорського ”, м. Київ , Україна  
ORCID ID 0000-0001-6195-5204 
serg191@ukr.net 
Анотація . У статті  обґрунтовано  роль  цифрової  трансформації  вищої  освіти  в Україні  в 
епоху  четвертої  індустріальної  революції . Доведено  потребу  розробки  стратегії  цифрової  
трансформації  університетської  освіти  та  формування  нових  інформаційно -комунікаційних  
компетентностей . На  думку  авторів , стратегія  цифрової  трансформації  системи  
університетської  освіти  повинна  включати  в себе  модернізацію  управління  корпоративною  
ІТ -архітектурою  університетів  на  основі  хмаро  орієнтованих  платформ . Авторами  
проаналізовано  основні  можливі  напрямки  трансформації  освітніх  послуг  і 
супроводжуючих  їх  бізнес -процесів . Запропоновано  використання  блокчейн  технології  для  
побудови  модуля  управління  освітнім  контентом , а також  інтеграція  таких  модулів  різних  ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learn ing Tools, 2018, Vol 64, №2. 
137 університетів  України , що  має  стати  підґрунтям  для  створення  глобальної  хмаро  
орієнтованої  платформи  системи  вищої  освіти . 
Ключові  слова : інформаційні  технології ; хмарні  обчислення ; цифрова  трансформація ; 
вища  освіта ; корпоративна  архітектура ; блокчейн ; цифрова  економіка ; інноваційний  
розвиток . 
ЦИФРОВАЯ  ТРАНСФОРМАЦИЯ  УНИВЕРСИТЕТСКОГО  ОБРАЗОВАНИЯ  В 
УКРАИНЕ : ТРАЕКТОРИИ  РАЗВИТИЯ  В УСЛОВИЯХ  НОВЕЙШЕГО  
ТЕХНИКО -ЭКОНОМИЧЕСКОГО  УКЛАДА  
Каминский  Олег  Евгеньевич  
кандидат  экономических  наук , доцент , доцент  кафедры  информационного  менеджмента  
Киевский  национальный  экономический  университет  имени  Вадима  Гетмана , г. Киев , Украина  
ORCID ID 0000-0003-0607-8944 
olkam@kneu.edu.ua 
Ерешко  Юлия  Александровна  
кандидат  экономических  наук , доцент , доцент  кафедры  теоретической  и прикладной  экономики  
НТУ  Украины  “ Киевский  политехнический  институт  имени  Игоря  Сикорского ”, г. Киев , Украина  
ORCID ID 0000-0002-9161-8820 
julia.jereshko@gmail.com  
Кириченко  Сергей  Александрович  
кандидат  экономических  наук , доцент  кафедры  экономики  и предпринимательства  
НТУ  Украины  “ Киевский  политехнический  институт  имени  Игоря  Сикорского ”, г. Киев , Украина  
ORCID ID 0000-0001-6195-5204 
serg191@ukr.net 
Аннотация . В статье  обоснована  роль  цифровой  трансформации  высшего  образования  в 
Украине  в эпоху  четвертой  индустриальной  революции . Доказана  необходимость  
разработки  стратегии  цифровой  трансформации  университетского  образования  и 
формирования  новых  информационно -коммуникационных  компетентностей . По  мнению  
авторов , стратегия  цифровой  трансформации  системы  университетского  образования  
должна  включать  в себя  модернизацию  управления  корпоративной  ІТ -архитектурой  
университетов  на  базе  облачно  ориентированных  платформ . Авторами  проанализированы  
основные  возможные  направления  трансформации  образовательных  услуг  и 
сопровождающих  их  бизнес -процессов . Предложено  использование  блокчейн  технологии  
для  построения  модуля  управления  образовательным  контентом , а также , интеграция  таких  
модулей  различных  университетов  Украины , которая  должна  стать  основой  для  создания  
глобальной  облачно  ориентированной  платформы  системы  высшего  образования . 
Ключевые  слова : информационные  технологии ; облачные  вычисления ; цифровая  
трансформация ; высшее  образование ; корпоративная  архитектура ; блокчейн ; цифровая  
экономика ; инновационное  развитие . 
 
 
 
 
 
This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribut ion-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Licen se. 
 