European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
European  Economic  Review  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/euroecorev  
Digital  antianxiety  treatment  and cognitive  performance:  An 
experimental  study  /p82 
Elisa Cavatorta  a , ∗, Simona  Grassi  b , Mark  Lambiris  c 
a Department  of Political Economy  King’s College London, United Kingdom  
b King’s Business School, Economics,  King’s College London, United Kingdom  
c Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute and University  of Basel, Basel, Switzerland  
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  23 December  2019 
Revised 7 November  2020 
Accepted  11 December  2020 
Available  online 30 December  2020 
JEL classiﬁcation:  
C91 
I10 
J16 
Keywords:  
Anxiety 
Cognitive  performance  
Gender 
Randomized  control trial a b s t r a c t 
We study the impact of an innovative  antianxiety  digital treatment  on performance  in a 
cognitive  demanding  task using a randomized  control trial design. We exogenously  ma- 
nipulate  a cognitive  bias associated  with anxiety –t h e tendency  to disproportionately  
allocate  attention  to negative  stimuli –i n a group of young males and females.  We ob- 
serve that the treatment  reduces  the cognitive  bias of treated females  and signiﬁcantly  
improves  their performance  in the cognitive  task. Evidence  from university  examination  
results taken three months  after the intervention  suggests  that the digital treatment  may 
generate  long-lasting  beneﬁts.  
©2 0 2 1 Elsevier  B.V. All rights reserved.  
1. Introduction  
Anxiety  disorders  are a signiﬁcant  public health concern  across the globe. According  to the US National  Institute  of 
Mental  Health (NIMH),  anxiety  disorders  are the most common  mental  illness in the USA, affecting  19% of the American  
adult population  annually.  In England,  data from the most recent Adult Psychiatric  Morbidity  Survey 2014 ( McManus  et al., 
2016 ) show that about 17% of adults had been affected  by a common  mental  disorder  in the previous  week, 1 with a mix 
of anxiety  and depression  (7.8%) and generalized  anxiety  disorder  (5.9%) being the two most common  disorders.  2 Some 
longitudinal  studies  document  an increasing  prevalence  of anxiety  and depression,  particularly  among  the young population  
/p82 The study was ﬁnanced  by a Swiss National Science Foundation  (SNSF) grant (Project number:  PDFMP1137024).  This study is registered  in the American  
Economic  Association  (AEA) RCT Registry and the unique identifying  number is: AEARCTR-0  0 05161. 
∗Corresponding  author. 
E-mail addresses:  elisa.cavatorta@kcl.ac.uk  (E. Cavatorta),  simona.grassi@kcl.ac.uk  (S. Grassi), mark.lambiris@swisstph.ch  (M. Lambiris).  
1 Common  mental disorders  include depression,  generalized  anxiety disorder,  panic, phobias, obsessive  compulsive  disorder,  and other not otherwise  
speciﬁed  disorders  referred to as “mixed anxiety and depression”.  
2 Mental health statistics  for the U.S. are taken from NIMH at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/prevalence/any-anxiety-disorder-among-adults.  
shtml and refer to the years 20  01-20 03; McManus  et al. (2016) is available  at https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20180328140249/http"//digital.nhs.  
uk/catalogue/PUB21748  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2020.103636  
0014-2921/© 2021  Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
( Twenge  et al., 2010 ). 3 A meta-analysis  of anxiety  prevalence  statistics  across countries  shows that females  are on average  
twice as likely to suffer from anxiety  than males (e.g. Remes et al., 2016 ), a remarkable  difference  even when possible  
gender  differences  in symptom  reporting  are taken into account.  4 
Anxiety  has important  and long-lasting  repercussions  on individuals’  health,  social functioning  and wellbeing.  In the 
UK, mental  illnesses  are estimated  to cost the economy  about 4.5% of GDP every year ( Stansfeld  et al., 2016 ). Das- 
Munshi  et al. (2008) estimate  that mixed anxiety  and depression  are responsible  for one-ﬁfth  of days off work,  representing  
the most frequent  cause of sickness  absence  in England.  According  to the UK Oﬃce for National  Statistics  (2018) there has 
been an increase  in the proportion  of younger  workers  aged 25–34, who attribute  their sickness  absence  to mental  health 
conditions,  rising from 7.2% in 2009 to 9.6% in 2017. 5 
Several  studies  show that for the same level of ability, anxiety  reduces  educational  performances  and professional  out- 
comes (see, e.g. Beard, 2011 ): anxiety  can be thought  of as a “tax on performance”.  Since anxiety  prevalence  varies across 
socio-demographic  groups,  the detrimental  effect on performance  can be expected  to affect some groups  more than others. 
A number  of studies  ﬁnd gender  differences  in performance  in high-pressure  environments  where anxiety  is likely to arise. 
For example,  Paserman  (2007) shows that in tennis tournaments  females  players  make more errors than males as compet-  
itive pressure  increases.  In a controlled  experiment  Cahlíková et  al. (2019) ﬁnd that women  under competitive  conditions  
perform  worse when they are stressed  relative  to when they are not stressed.  Coffman  (2014) shows that females  attempt  
fewer questions  in a quiz than males, even after controlling  for knowledge  and conﬁdence.  Anxiety  may explain  these dif- 
ferences:  if anxiety  triggers  behaviors  that are associated  with poorer performance  in stressful  situations  (e.g., being less 
focused),  then the anxiety-driven  penalty  on performance  penalizes  females  more than it does males. Given the prevalence  
of examination  and quiz-based  assessments  as screening  devices,  the anxiety  tax on performance  may be partly respon-  
sible for the gender  imbalances  observed  in quiz-based  rankings  and the prejudices  around  females  being less skillful in 
quantitative  subjects  (e.g. Guiso et al., 2008 ). 6 
An important  question  arises: Can specialized  interventions  help mitigate  the detrimental  impact  of anxiety  on perfor-  
mance?  Here we provide  an answer  by evaluating  the impact  of an innovative  form of antianxiety  training,  the cognitive  
bias modiﬁcation  (CBM), on performance  in a cognitive  test in groups  of young males and females,  using a randomized  
control  trial (RCT) with a difference-in-difference  design.  Studies  in cognitive  psychology  and neuroscience  have shown that 
anxiety  impairs  the use of attentional  control  resources  that are necessary  inputs for successful  performance  in cognitive  
tasks. 7 CBM treatment  aims to restore  the use of attentional  control  resources.  
CBM treatment  was developed  by cognitive  psychologists  ( MacLeod  et al., 1986 ) and is based on the premise  that some 
of the cognitive  biases through  which an individual  perceives  reality are a cause of anxiety.  CBM addresses  attention  bias, 
one of the most widely recognized  biases associated  with anxiety.  Attention  bias is the tendency  to disproportionately  and 
more rapidly  attend to threatening  stimuli  in comparison  with other concurrent  neutral  stimuli.  8 
Anxiety  reduces  performance  because  it subconsciously  drives an individual’s  attention  toward  threatening  distractors  
that are irrelevant  to the task to be completed  (see, e.g Eysenck  and Derakshan,  2011; Wilson  and MacLeod,  2003 ). For 
example,  while taking a test, an anxious  student  is more likely to be distracted  by her worries  about the test or other 
threatening  cues in the surrounding  environment.  Performance  will suffer from attentional  control  resources  being diverted  
away from stimuli  relevant  to the completion  of the task toward  task-irrelevant  stimuli.  Anxious  individuals  may compensate  
for decrements  in performance  by exerting  additional  effort. However,  such effort is costly and its effectiveness  is decreasing,  
especially  when the task is demanding.  9 
CBM treatment  reduces  attention  bias by training  individual  attention.  CBM is a computer-based  training  in which pairs 
of threatening  and neutral  stimuli  appear  sequentially  on the screen.  The subject  is trained  to divert attention  away from 
threatening  stimuli  by requiring  repeated  identiﬁcation  of the location  of the neutral  stimulus  in a pair of neutral  and 
3 Part of the observed  increase in prevalence  may be due to improvements  in diagnosis  and changes in the acceptability  of reporting  mental health 
disorders,  but studies that take these confounders  into account still show increases  in the prevalence  of mental health disorders  ( Twenge et al., 2010 ). 
4 According  to the Adult Psychiatric  Morbidity  Survey 2014 Report from England ( McManus  et al., 2016 ), for the same level of mental health disorder 
(and assuming  everyone  who reports the disorder,  receives treatment),  for every ﬁve females who report it, only two out of ﬁve males report the same 
disorder.  
5 The ONS report and data are available  at https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/  
sicknessabsencefallstothelowestratein24years/2018-  07- 30 . 
6 For example,  in 2016 twice as many male students  in Mathematics  and Computer  Science at the University  of Oxford received a ﬁrst-class  honours –t h e 
highest grade classiﬁcation  in the UK higher education  system –t h a n female students.  As a response,  the university  extended  the duration  of examinations  
in the belief that the observed  gender gap in academic  performance  was due to females being more adversely  affected by time pressure in examinations  
than males. See https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2018/02/01/oxford-university-extends-exam-times-womens-beneﬁt/  
7 Attentional  control resources  include the ability to shift attention  to speciﬁc features of the task that are most relevant for its completion,  the ability to 
inhibit attention  to distractors  and interferences,  and the ability to keep track of and to retrieve relevant information  (see Derakshan  and Eysenck,  2009 ). 
8 Other biases associated  with anxiety are memory bias and interpretative  bias. The former is the tendency  to retrieve memories  selectively  favoring 
negative information,  while the latter is the tendency  to resolve ambiguity  toward a negative direction.  The experimental  psychopathology  literature  has 
focused so far mainly on attention  bias. 
9 Attentional  control theory predicts that anxiety impairs attention  control even in cases where there are no threat-related  stimuli irrelevant  to com- 
pletion of the task. This is because the optimal strategy of anxious individuals,  who often feel under general threat, is to allocate attentional  resources  
widely in order to preempt dangers, rather than concentrating  attentional  resources  on speciﬁc focuses. This implies a reduction  in the attentional  control 
resources  available  for any given cognitive  task. 
2 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
threatening  stimuli.  We expect CBM-treated  participants  to reduce their attention  bias and to improve  their performance  in 
a cognitive  task. The improvement  in performance  originates  from liberating  cognitive  resources  previously  trapped  by the 
focus on threatening  and anxiety-generating  stimuli.  Larger reductions  in attention  bias may be expected  in more anxious  
individuals,  such as females,  leading  in turn to greater  improvement  in task performance.  
CBM treatment  has advantages  in comparison  with alternative  treatments  such as cognitive  behavioral  therapy  (CBT) 
and antidepressant  medications  that aim to reduce the consequences  of anxiety  or the anxiety  itself. The meta-analysis  by 
Hakamata  et al. (2010) shows that, on clinical  patient  samples,  CBM treatment  yields effect sizes of comparable  magni-  
tude to those from CBT and drug treatments.  Yet, CBM is cheaper,  easier to administer  to patients,  amenable  to large-scale  
interventions,  non-invasive  and, insofar  as it has been tested, well accepted  by patients  ( Beard, 2011 ). 
Our results show that CBM reduces  attention  bias in treated  females  and produces  signiﬁcant  improvements  in perfor-  
mance in a cognitive  task for this group, measured  as the number  of attempted  questions  in the test. Treated  females’  
performance  increases  on average  by 38% compared  with control  group females’  performance.  Males do not show a signif- 
icant reduction  in bias, and consequently,  have no performance  improvement.  This is not due to a differential  engagement  
with the treatment.  10 A more plausible  explanation  is that males are originally  less anxious  than females  and may have less 
to gain from the treatment.  Rather,  it is the anxious  females,  who are more likely to be penalized  by anxiety,  who obtain 
the largest increases  in performance.  
This paper makes several  contributions.  First, our results inform the use of digital health treatments  against  one of the 
most common  mental  health conditions  worldwide:  anxiety.  The results in this paper focus on CBM and extend the recent 
evidence  on its eﬃcacy  in two ways. i) The results evidence  the impact  of CBM on a real behavioral  outcome  typically  
hindered  by anxiety:  performance  in a cognitive  task. Whereas  previous  psychological  and psychopathological  studies  have 
demonstrated  encouraging  effects of CBM on measures  of attention  bias and anxiety,  this study brings these ﬁndings  a step 
forward  by analysing  the resulting  changes  in behavior.  ii) The study’s  design tests the eﬃcacy  of CBM using a novel group of 
people that is larger and more representative  of the levels of anxiety  in the general  population  than previous  studies,  most 
of which were conﬁned  to small samples  of pathologically  anxious  patients.  11 In contrast,  this study’s  sample  comprises  261 
university  students,  with a broad range of anxiety  levels reﬂecting  the distribution  of anxiety  in the general  population.  For 
this reason,  our ﬁndings  are the ﬁrst, as far as we know, to inform of the expected  impact  of CBM on a ‘typical’  user, as 
opposed  to selective  groups  of responsive  users. 
Second,  the ﬁnding  that exogenous  manipulation  of attention  bias can affect performance  in cognitive  tasks contributes  to 
the understanding  of the range of non-cognitive  factors affecting  performance.  Our work adds to the literature  on the roles 
of personality  traits ( Moutaﬁ et  al., 2006; Borghans  et al., 2008 ), grit and determination  ( Alan et al., 2019 ). By focusing  on a 
sample  of young adults, the paper also contributes  to the scant body of evidence  on the response  of non-cognitive  skills to 
interventions  in adulthood  ( Blattman  et al., 2017 , e.g.). Despite  the recognized  malleability  of attitudes  and behaviors  during 
young adulthood  ( Krosnick  and Alwin, 1989 ), the empirical  evidence  is thin in comparison  to the large number  of works 
documenting  interventions  in early childhood.  
Third, the paper contributes  to the current  debate on the limitations  of exams and standardized  tests as screening  devices  
for cognitive  ability ( Rear, 2019 ). Our results show that the performance  of anxiety-prone  individuals  signiﬁcantly  increases  
following  a reduction  in attention  bias. This is indicative  of the extent to which typical assessments  of cognitive  ability may 
be poor proxies  due to the impact  of anxiety.  
The remainder  of paper is organized  as follows:  Section  2 explains  the CBM treatment;  Section  3 describes  the experi-  
mental  design;  Section  4 presents  the empirical  strategy;  Section  5 provides  evidence  that the CBM treatment  was effective  
in reducing  attention  bias and increasing  performance  in a cognitive  task; Section  6 concludes  the paper. The Supplementary  
Material  (SM) discusses  robustness  tests. 
2. The treatment:  Cognitive  bias modiﬁcation  
CBM treatment  aims to mitigate  the consequences  of anxiety  by re-diverting  the subconscious  focus on threatening  stim- 
uli toward  neutral  or positive  ones. The treatment  is computer-based  and involves  the rapid sequential  appearance  of pairs 
of visual stimuli  on the screen.  We adopted  the version  of CBM that uses pairs of photographs  of human  faces as visual 
stimuli.  In each pair of photographs,  the face of the same person  appears  with an angry expression  (threat  stimulus)  and an 
emotionally  neutral  expression  (neutral  stimulus).  Figure SM.1 in the SM presents  an example  of the pair of faces used in 
the experiment.  12 
10 In additional  analysis, we have studied whether the difference  in the effect of CBM between  genders could be attributed  to female participants  comply- 
ing with the instructions  differently  compared  to males and/or engaging  with the CBM training with a different  degree of commitment  than males, to an 
extent suﬃcient  to create different  levels of intensity  of the CBM treatment.  However,  we did not ﬁnd any strong supporting  evidence  for this hypothesis.  
The analysis is available  upon request. 
11 For example,  among the pool of 12 studies included  in the most recent meta-analysis  of CBM eﬃcacy by Hakamata  et al. (2010) , the largest sample 
size used comprises  94 subjects.  
12 Visual stimuli used in CBM procedures  include words, such as in the pioneering  work by MacLeod  et al. (1986) , or faces such as in Eldar and Bar- 
Haim (2010) which is the protocol that we follow, or See et al. (2009) and Li et al. (2008) . Faces are taken from validated  databases;  we used the Karolin- 
ska Directed Emotional  Faces (KDEF) database  ( Lundqvist  et al., 1998 ). Validation  guarantees  that the expressions  portrayed  by the actors are accurately  
3 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Participants  see each pair of angry and neutral  faces at the center of their computer  screen for 500 milliseconds  (ms), 
before the faces disappear.  The photographs  are juxtaposed  from left to right with a space in between.  The location  of the 
angry and the neutral  faces on the right or on the left of the screen is randomized.  After the faces have disappeared,  a probe 
(in the form of a small cross) pops up for 500ms at the location  of one of the two images.  The task for the participant  is 
to identify  the location  of the probe as rapidly  and accurately  as possible  by clicking  on a prespeciﬁed  key on the keyboard,  
one for the left and one for the right position.  Then, another  screen with another  pair of faces appears  and the procedure  
repeats.  A CBM session  consists  of 360 consecutive  screens.  A session  lasts for about 10 minutes.  The participants  in our 
study completed  a minimum  of 16 sessions  (one per day). Section  3 on experimental  design describes  how we ensure 
compliance  throughout  the study period.  Figure SM.2 in the SM presents  an example  of the CBM task. 
CBM trains participants  in the treatment  group to avoid threats  by presenting  the probe always at the location  of the 
neutral  face. In the control  condition  the probe is equally  likely to replace  the neutral  or the angry face. The response  la- 
tency, i.e., the time that passes from the moment  when the probe appears  to the moment  when the participant  clicks on the 
keyboard  to indicate  its location,  is a measure  of attention.  Participants  have an attention  bias if they respond  considerably  
faster to probes replacing  the threatening  stimulus  in comparison  with the neutral  one. 
The eﬃcacy  of the CBM treatment  in reducing  attention  bias is supported  by a variety  of studies.  A meta-analysis  of CBM 
in 12 RCTs ( Hakamata  et al., 2010 ) found signiﬁcant  improvements  in attention  bias, with a rather large effect size ( d= 1.16, 
CI = (0.82,1.5)),  and in various  anxiety  measures,  with a medium  effect size ( d= 0.61, CI = (0.42, 0.81)) on average,  and a larger 
effect for individuals  who were pathologically  anxious  ( d= 0.78) than for those who were not ( d= 0.48). 
Selected  CBM sessions  are preceded  and followed  by 60 screens  equivalent  to the control  condition,  i.e. the probe replaces  
either stimulus  with equal frequency.  Therefore  these longer sessions  include  a sequence  of 60 screens  (random  probe) + 360 
screens  (CBM treatment/control  condition)  + 60 screens  (random  probe) and are called assessment  sessions.  These sessions  
are useful to assess the response  latency  toward  threatening  stimuli  in the treatment  group (which  otherwise  would not 
be observed)  and therefore  validate  the eﬃcacy  of the CBM treatment  over different  sessions.  Selected  days for assessment  
sessions  are the same for all participants,  whether  in the treatment  or control  conditions.  
3. Experimental  design  
In this section  we describe  our sampling  frame, the way in which we administered  the CBM treatment  and the experi-  
mental  design.  
Our sample  comes from a database  of students  from the University  of Lausanne  and the Swiss Federal  Institute  of Tech- 
nology in Lausanne.  A total of 60 0 0 students  received  an invitation  to complete  a questionnaire  to measure  their trait 
anxiety,  the tendency  to experience  anxiety  in general.  We adopt an established  questionnaire  called the State–Trait  Anx- 
iety Inventory  (STAI) developed  by Spielberger  (1980) . The STAI is composed  of 40 questions  addressed  at identifying  two 
dimensions  of anxiety:  a permanent  stable trait (trait anxiety)  and a temporary  stimulus-induced  anxiety  state (state anxi- 
ety). For either dimension,  the STAI produces  a scale ranging  from 20 to 80 points in which a value above 45 is considered  
to indicate  a highly anxious  individual  (see Yiend et al., 2005; Salemink  et al., 2009 ). 13 To increase  the variation  of trait 
anxiety  in the experimental  sample  while offering  the treatment  to people who would potentially  gain from it, we deﬁned  
treatment  beneﬁciaries  as those who scored a value of at least 35 points in trait anxiety.  
The sample  includes  the ﬁrst 300 students  with trait anxiety  above 35 who accepted  our invitation.  Owing to no-shows  
( n = 7 ) and a small rate of attrition,  the ﬁnal longitudinal  empirical  sample  consists  of 261 subjects.  Attrition  is not corre- 
lated with treatment,  and is balanced  in terms of observables;  see Table SM.1 in SM. 14 
The experiment  is based on a longitudinal  design with randomization  of the treatment  at the individual  level. Partici-  
pants took part in a baseline  laboratory  session  that included  the ﬁrst CBM intervention  and was an assessment  session  (i.e., 
60 + 360 + 60 screens).  The treatment  was assigned  randomly  when participants  attended  their ﬁrst laboratory  session.  15 
Part of the CBM treatment  was conducted  at home, over a period of three weeks, for a total of 14 CBM completed  sessions  
( Fig. 1 illustrates  the timeline  of the experiment).  16 A CBM session  is considered  completed  if the participant  identiﬁes  the 
recognized  by third parties as communicating  the intended  emotions  ( Goeleven  et al., 2008 ). The KDEF contains seventy different  pairs of faces, half of 
which use male actors and half female actors. 
13 Typical questions  to measure  trait anxiety in the STAI ask subjects to indicate which answers among “almost never”,“sometimes”,  “often”,“almost  
always” they  feel satisﬁed with themselves,  or how frequently  they feel as happy as others seem to be, etc. 
14 Out of the 300 students,  7 did not show up to the initial laboratory  session and were excluded  for the study; 32 (15 treated and 17 control subjects)  
were dropped from the sample because they either did not turn up at the ﬁnal laboratory  session or they did not comply with the rules of the training. 
15 Participants  were randomly  allocated  to computer  cubicles in the lab. On the cubicle’s  desk, they found the CBM instruction  pack with an ID number 
stapled to the ﬁrst page of the pack. A range of ID numbers  were associated  with the control condition  and a different  range was associated  with the 
treatment  condition.  Nowhere  in the instructions  was there a reference  to the treatment  or control condition.  The instructions  are available  upon request. 
16 The CBM training was programmed  using Inquisit 4 . The instructions  to access the CBM training include four simple steps: opening a webpage,  entering 
a unique ID, downloading  and running the application  that produces  the CBM task, and completing  the task. The URL link to access the training and the 
dates on which the home-sessions  had to be completed  were printed in the instruction  pack given to participants  in their ﬁrst laboratory  sessions.  Access 
to all CBM sessions occurred  in the same manner, whether the CBM session was conducted  in the laboratory  or from a personal  computer  at home. 
Participants  could ask questions  in regard to the procedure  to access the CBM training in person, during the ﬁrst laboratory  session, and by email during 
the training period. The home-session  completion  and click accuracy  were monitored.  
4 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
BASELINE
LAB 1
1. Cognitive task (timed)
2. 1st CBM session [assessment]Treatment over 3 weeks
14 sessions of CBM at homeCBM
assessmentCBM
assessmentCBM
assessmentCBM
assessmentFOLLOW-UP
LAB 2
1. 16th (last) CBM session [assessment]
2. Cognitive task (timed)
Fig. 1. Timeline  of experiment.  
location  of the probe correctly  in a minimum  of 90% of the screens.  We extensively  monitored  treatment  compliance.  17 The 
experiment  concluded  with a follow-up  laboratory  CBM session  that was an assessment  session.  We incentivized  participa-  
tion with a contribution  of CHF 110 (approximately  €91) to be paid at the end of the study on condition  of full compliance.  
The baseline  and follow-up  laboratory  sessions  included  a cognitive  task and were programmed  using zTree 
( Fischbacher,  2007 ). The task consisted  in answering  a selection  of questions  taken from the Raven’s  Progressive  Matri- 
ces booklet  ( Raven et al., 2003 ). Each question  includes  a group of logically  related  geometric  designs  with one missing  
piece that the participant  had to identify  from some available  options.  Participants  were asked to answer  correctly  as many 
questions  as possible  in 10 minutes.  Two different  sets of questions  were drawn at baseline  and follow-up  to minimize  the 
possibility  of memorizing  answers.  In the ﬁrst laboratory  session,  the cognitive  task was done before the CBM treatment,  
whereas  in the follow-up  laboratory  session,  the CBM treatment  preceded  the cognitive  task. 
Our measure  of performance  in the cognitive  task is the number  of attempted  questions  within the 10 minutes,  regardless  
of whether  the answers  are correct  or incorrect.  This choice rests on the purpose  of CBM: restoring  attentional  control  
resources  that enable participants  to be more focused  and eﬃcient  in answering  cognitively  demanding  questions.  CBM is 
not expected  to change  cognitive  ability and therefore  we expect the ratio of the number  of correct  answers  to attempted  
questions  to remain  constant.  An alternative  outcome  variable  would be the number  of correct  answers.  Whereas  attempting  
a question  can be directly  linked to cognitive  resources  being freed up, answering  a question  correctly  is a probabilistic  
outcome  conditional  on attempting  the question.  The probability  of a correct  answer  depends  on several  individual  factors 
(such as subject’s  IQ, familiarity  with the questions,  etc.) and a (random)  luck component.  This individual  heterogeneity  is 
expected  to increase  the residual  variance  of the measurement.  We report our results with respect  to correct  answers  in the 
Supplementary  Material.  18 
For every CBM screen,  we collected  the length of time (in milliseconds)  taken by the participant  to identify  the location  
of the probe on the screen.  Typically,  CBM studies  exclude  latencies  that are too fast or too slow because  these are not 
indicative  of sensible  response  times given the task. We follow Zvielli et al. (2014) and See et al. (2009) and exclude  latencies  
smaller  than 200ms and greater  than 1500ms,  which results in 2.7% of the latencies  observations  being dropped.  
To measure  attention  bias at baseline  we average  (within  subject)  response  latencies  to threat and neutral  stimuli  in 
the ﬁrst 60 screens  of the ﬁrst laboratory  assessment  session  (in which the probe replaces  threat and neutral  stimuli  with 
equal frequency  for both control  and treatment  groups).  The attention  bias measure  is ( ¯N −¯T ) pre,i , where ¯N and ¯T are 
averages  within subject  over the 60 screens  and the subscript  “pre” indicates  that the measurement  is pre-treatment.  When 
( ¯N −¯T ) pre,i > 0 attention  bias is present.  
4. Empirical  strategy  
To examine  the causal effect of the CBM training  on attention  bias and performance  in the cognitive  test, we adopt 
an empirical  model explaining  pre-post  treatment  changes  in attempted  questions  (a difference-in-difference  design).  This 
allows us to control  for unobserved  (time-invariant)  factors that may inﬂuence  the outcome  variable  and might be correlated  
17 To ensure that participants  completed  the necessary  sessions of CBM at home, we sent daily reminder  e-mails and called participants  on the phone if 
they missed a CBM session. The CBM sessions had to be completed  by 10 p.m. every day. If catching up of a missed session was required or the participant  
did not meet the required 90% score of correct clicks, then the participant  was instructed  to conduct the CBM session during the weekend.  Noncompliers  
were eliminated  from the experiment.  In rare instances,  subjects completed  more than one CBM session on the same day. In these cases, only the ﬁrst 
completed  session is included  in the analysis. Overall average click accuracy  per sessions was 95%. 
18 The Raven’s questions  appeared  sequentially  on the computer  screen. The score in this task - that is, the number of correct answers– was  not directly 
incentivized;  however,  participants  were informed  that (i) the experimenter  would calculate  their score, and (ii) this score would affect successive  tasks 
and the ﬁnal earnings.  We have no reason to believe that subjects did not aim to answer the task questions  correctly.  The overall ratio of correct answers 
to attempted  questions  is 0.65 (pre-treatment);  if subjects had answered  questions  randomly  this ratio would be close to 1/6 since there is one correct 
answer out of six possible options. 
5 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
with the CBM treatment  condition,  despite  the treatment  being randomized  by design.  The baseline  model speciﬁcation  is: 
y it = β0 + a i + β1 CBM it + δ0 t endline + u it , t = 1 , 2 . (1) 
where a i captures  unobserved  individual-speciﬁc  traits; CBM it is an indicator  variable  representing  treatment  assignment,  
that equals 1 if the subject  is in the treatment  group and 0 if the subject  is in the control  group. t endline is an indicator  
variable  for the post-treatment  period.  Finally,  u it is a disturbance  term. We estimate  the treatment  effect by estimating  the 
following  ﬁrst-differenced  equation,  which removes  a i : 
/Delta1y i = β1 /Delta1CBM i + δ0 + /Delta1u i (2) 
The empirical  speciﬁcation  (2) further  controls  for observed  heterogeneity  due to age, trait anxiety  (and its squared  value) 
and type of study (in the robustness  analysis)  measured  at the pre-treatment  stage. The causal interpretation  of the impact  
of CBM relies on the assumption  that E (/Delta1CBM i /Delta1u i ) = 0 , i.e., the change  in treatment  status is assumed  to be uncorrelated  
with the change  in the idiosyncratic  errors. The ordinary  least squares  (OLS) estimator  of β1 gives a consistent  estimate  of 
the average  treatment  effect. We bootstrap  standard  errors at the level of the individual.  
We estimate  the model by sex. We split the sample  by sex because  of biological  and neurological  differences  between  
males and females  which may inﬂuence  our outcome  variables  differently.  The estimation  by sex allows the control  variables  
to yield different  effects on the outcome  in regard to both sign and magnitude  (something  that we observe  empirically,  for 
example  for the effect of age). 
5. Results  
This section  discusses  two sets of results:  ﬁrst, we evaluate  the eﬃcacy  of the CBM treatment  in reducing  attention  bias; 
second,  we evaluate  the impact  on participant  performance  in the cognitive  test. 
There are no systematic  differences  between  treatment  and control  group in terms of individual  characteristics,  such 
as age, program  of study, years of study, (self-reported)  average  grades and trait anxiety  between  the male and female 
samples  (Tables  SM.2 for females  and SM.3 for males in SM). T-tests of mean differences  in attempted  questions  show 
statistical  signiﬁcant  differences  within genders.  These differences  are due to a small number  of ‘extreme’  observations  in the 
lower tail of the distribution  of the outcome  variable.  The SM provides  a robustness  analysis  on a restricted  sample  where 
observations  below the 5th and above the 95th percentile  of the outcome  distribution  are excluded  (Table SM.7, which we 
discuss  in Subsection  5.2 ). Attention  bias at baseline  shows signiﬁcant  heterogeneity  among  participants:  attention  bias is 
observed  in 54% of female and male samples,  with an average  attention  bias of 21 ms in females  and 20 ms in males (see 
Table SM.4). This means that our average  treatment  effect (ATE) estimates  are lower bound estimates  of the CBM impact,  
since only about 54% of subjects  display  an observable  attention  bias. 
In the female sample,  we observe  a mildly higher baseline  ( ¯N −¯T ) pre,i in the treatment  arm on average,  but the differ- 
ence is not statistically  signiﬁcant.  The average  number  of attempted  questions  and correct  answers  in the cognitive  test 
(which  are outcome  variables)  at baseline  are moderately  higher in the control  group. The difference-in-difference  em pirical 
strategy  will correct  for initial differences  between  treatment  arms. Across gender,  we observe  females  having higher levels 
of trait anxiety  than males ( p-value < 0.01), in line with the higher prevalence  of anxiety  in females  in the population.  
Surprisingly,  we do not ﬁnd a strong correlation  between  the measures  of trait anxiety  and attention  bias. We adopted  the 
STAI test to measure  trait anxiety  to keep with the existing  literature,  however  future research  may wish to investigate  more 
sophisticated  and objective  measures,  such as biomarkers.  
5.1. Validation  of treatment  eﬃcacy  
Participants  in the CBM treatment  condition,  where the probe always replaces  the neutral  stimulus,  are trained  to become  
faster at locating  the neutral  stimulus.  Participants  in the control  condition,  where the probe randomly  replaces  either the 
neutral  or the threatening  stimulus,  are not expected  to change  their response  times, at least not in a different  way for either 
one of the stimuli  (since, potentially,  they can become  faster at identifying  the location  of both, an indication  of possible  
‘learning  effects’).  In the spirit of a validation  test, the comparison  between  response  latencies  to the neutral  stimuli  in the 
treatment  and control  groups  over CBM sessions  provides  a ﬁrst test of the eﬃcacy  of the CBM treatment  in reducing  the 
attention  bias. 
In Fig. 2 we compare  the median  response  time to neutral  stimuli  between  treatment  and control  group in each session  
relative  to the initial (i.e., the ﬁrst CBM session  in the laboratory)  median  response  time. Fig. 2 shows a signiﬁcant  decrease  
in response  latency  in the treatment  group over sessions.  A large proportion  of the decrease  occurs within the ﬁrst four 
sessions,  after which the rate of decrease  is slower.  Reaction  times to neutral  stimuli  in the control  group remain  stable, 
except for some variability  in the later sessions.  19 We show the median  response  latency  since it is less sensitive  to outliers  
19 Figure SM.3 in SM shows that, in the control group, the median reaction times to threat stimuli closely mirror the median reaction times to neutral 
stimuli across sessions.  This evidence  speaks against the idea that latencies  to neutral or threat stimuli change in a different  way over time. This also allays 
the concern that latencies  toward neutral stimuli might be easier to modify relative to latencies  to threat stimuli. 
6 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Fig. 2. Median response  time to neutral face relative to the ﬁrst assessment  session. Note: The ﬁgure shows the median reaction time towards neutral 
stimuli in each session relative to the initial median reaction time (session 1 in the laboratory)  in the treatment  group (purple square) and control group 
(orange circle). The 95% conﬁdence  intervals  are computed  using the between-subjects  variation.  (For interpretation  of the references  to colour in this 
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
and therefore  is a more conservative  measure  than the mean. Figure SM.4 in the SM shows that using the mean reaction  
times does not produce  a different  pattern.  
A second  way to test the eﬃcacy  of CBM is to measure  the extent to which an entire course of CBM training  reduces  at- 
tention  bias in the treatment  group relative  to the control.  To measure  and compare  the attention  bias, we need to observe  
the reaction  times to neutral  and threatening  stimuli.  We can compare  the response  times to neutral  stimuli  between  treat- 
ment and control  groups  in each CBM session , but we do not have observations  for threatening  stimuli  for participants  in the 
treatment  group since they always observe  the probe replacing  the neutral  stimuli.  However,  both treatment  and control  
groups  see neutral  and threatening  stimuli  in the assessment  sessions.  We evaluate  the impact  of the entire course of CBM 
training  on attention  bias by measuring  the attention  bias in the 60 screens  preceding  the ﬁrst CBM session  at baseline  (i.e., 
ﬁrst assessment  session)  and in the 60 screens  following  the last CBM session  in the follow-up  (post-treatment)  laboratory  
session  (which  completes  the three-week-long  CBM treatment)  for the treatment  and control  groups.  
We calculate  the average  change  in attention  bias, that is 1 
n /Sigma1n 
i [( ¯N −¯T ) post,i −( ¯N −¯T ) pre,i ] where ¯N and ¯T are the (average)  
reaction  times (in milliseconds,  and the average  is taken over the 60 screens  within subject  i ) to neutral  ( N) and threat ( T ) 
stimuli  and the subscripts  “post” and  “pre” indicate  that the measurement  is post-treatment  and pre-treatment,  respectively.  
If CBM is effective,  one would expect a negative  overall difference  (since attention  bias post-treatment  will be smaller  than 
the initial bias). 
Table 1 reports  the CBM average  treatment  effect on attention  bias on all females  and males (Panel:  Everyone)  and on 
the sample  of female and male participants  with pre-treatment  attention  bias (Panel:  Conditional  on attention  bias). The 
average  treatment  impact  is a reduction  in attention  bias of -18 ms for females.  There is no evidence  of attention  bias 
reduction  for males. The CBM impact  on subjects  with (pre-treatment)  attention  bias gives an indication  of the average  
CBM treatment  effect on the treated . The unconditional  effects are plotted  in Fig. 3 . 20 CBM-treated  females  with attention  
bias show a reduction  of -23 ms on average  ( p-value = 0.001), as compared  with females  with attention  bias in the control  
group. Table SM.6 shows that larger decreases  in attention  bias occur among  female participants  who start with a higher 
pre-treatment  attention  bias. In this category,  CBM reduces  approximately  60% of the average  attention  bias. 
20 One may expect the change in attention  bias between  post- and pre-treatment  to be zero for the control group. While theoretically  possible,  this does 
not happen empirically.  We observe that for control group participants  who have attention  bias at baseline,  the gap ( ¯N −¯T ) post ,i in the post-treatment  
session shrinks relative to its pre-treatment  value, so that the overall difference  post- and pre-treatment  is negative on average. Reduction  in attention  bias 
in the control group is a feature reported  in other evaluations  as well ( Eldar and Bar-Haim,  2010 ). It would be concerning  if ¯N and ¯T in the control group 
went in opposite  directions  (e.g., with ¯T increasing  and ¯N decreasing,  or vice versa). Panel A in Table SM.5 in the SM reports ¯N and ¯T of control participants  
with baseline attention  bias for each session and shows that the two measures  move in the same direction.  This is reassuring.  A similar pattern is observed  
in the entire sample (panel B of Table SM.5). Furthermore,  we use a difference-in-difference  approach,  which controls for pre–post-treatment  changes in 
the control group. 
7 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Fig. 3. Change in attention  bias, by treatment  and sex. Note: The ﬁgure shows the reduction  in attention  bias pre- and post- treatment  for the female 
and male samples in treatment  and control groups. The ﬁgure plots the average unconditional  changes, 1 
n /Sigma1n 
i [( ¯N −¯T ) post,i −( ¯N −¯T ) pre,i ] . For the changes 
conditional  on controls,  see Table 1 . 
Table 1 
CBM impact on changes in attention  bias: everyone  and conditional  on Attention  bias, N-T > 0. 
Panel: Everyone  Female Male Female Male 
CBM –18.369 ∗∗∗3.968 –16.691 ∗∗3.910 
(7.008) (6.310) (6.953) (6.489) 
Age 2.655 ∗1.580 
(1.485) (1.286) 
Trait anxiety (pre-treatment)  –2.909 0.618 
(2.942) (2.744) 
Trait anxiety (squared)  0.033 –0.004 
(0.033) (0.031) 
Constant  3.224 –2.639 6.251 –53.295 
(4.650) (4.934) (61.042)  (68.566)  
R 2 0.061 0.003 0.095 0.015 
N 129 126 129 125 
Panel: Conditional  on 
Attention  BIAS, N-T > 0 Female Male Female Male 
CBM –23.823 ∗∗∗8.389 –22.666 ∗∗∗7.056 
(6.870) (8.007) (7.961) (7.763) 
Age –0.098 1.201 
(1.752) (1.671) 
Trait anxiety (pre-treatment)  –2.829 –0.208 
(3.249) (2.697) 
Trait anxiety (squared)  0.031 0.007 
(0.036) (0.030) 
Constant  –14.038 ∗∗∗–23.351 ∗∗∗47.857 –53.408 
(4.617) (5.393) (67.347)  (68.152)  
R 2 0.140 0.019 0.155 0.039 
N 69 68 69 67 
Note: The table shows the CBM impact on changes in attention  bias between  pre and post- 
treatment  ( Eq. 2 ). Attention  bias is measured  as the difference  in response  latency to neu- 
tral versus threat stimuli. Regressions  in panel: Conditional  on Attention  bias are estimated  
on the sample of subjects with pre-treatment  positive attention  bias. Estimations  are based 
on OLS regressions.  Standard  errors are bootstrapped  with 150 replications  and reported  in 
brackets.  Levels of signiﬁcance:  * p < 0 . 1 , ** p < 0 . 05 , *** p < 0 . 01 . 
8 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Table 2 
CBM impact on changes in attempted  questions  in cognitive  test. 
Male Female Male Female 
CBM –0.005 0.995 ∗∗0.148 1.106 ∗∗
(0.462) (0.458) (0.460) (0.458) 
Trait anxiety (pre-treatment)  0.412 ∗∗–0.476 ∗∗
(0.180) (0.242) 
Trait anxiety (squared)  –0.005 ∗∗0.005 ∗
(0.002) (0.003) 
Age 0.340 ∗∗∗–0.016 
(0.092) (0.116) 
Constant  2.841 ∗∗∗2.697 ∗∗∗–12.548 ∗∗∗13.070 ∗∗∗
(0.290) (0.307) (4.439) (4.778) 
R 2 0.000 0.030 0.110 0.076 
N 130 131 130 131 
Mean /Delta1Attempted  (control)  2.841 2.696 2.841 2.696 
Note: The table shows the CBM impact on (changes  in) attempted  questions  in the 
Raven’s Matrices  test between  pre- and post-treatment  by gender estimated  according  
to Eq. 2 in columns 1–2 and adjusted  for pre-treatment  covariates  in columns 3.4. Esti- 
mations are based on OLS regressions.  Standard  errors are bootstrapped  with 150 repli- 
cations and reported  in brackets.  Levels of signiﬁcance:  * p < 0 . 1 , ** p < 0 . 05 , *** p < 0 . 01 
5.2. Impacts  on cognitive  performance  
Table 2 reports  the estimated  impact  of CBM on performance  in the cognitive  test, measured  as the number  of attempted  
questions  as described  in Section  3 . CBM-treated  female participants  signiﬁcantly  improve  their performance;  however,  there 
is no signiﬁcant  impact  for males on average,  although  the coeﬃcient  is positive.  The magnitude  of the impact  on females  
is large: the impact  equates  to approximately  one additional  attempted  question  above an average  of 2.7 (equivalent  to an 
approximately  37% increase).  These results are consistent  with the effects of CBM reported  in Section  5.1 , which suggest  that 
CBM reduces  attention  bias for treated  females  but not for treated  males. 
One explanation  for the gender  heterogeneity  of the treatment  impact  is that the effects of CBM are more visible at 
higher levels of anxiety,  which females  display  more than males. Consistent  with this interpretation,  Table 3 conﬁrms  that 
CBM treatment  is more effective  on those females  scoring  baseline  anxiety  levels higher than the females  group’s  median.  
The impact  on anxious  females  is three times as large than on less anxious  females  ( p-value < 0.0 0 0). As a robustness  
test, in Table SM.9 in the SM we show that the gender  heterogeneity  of the treatment  impact  persists  when the number  
of correct  answers  in the cognitive  test is used as the outcome  variable.  The average  treatment  effect on the entire female 
sample  (Panel A) is, however,  less precisely  estimated  due to a larger unobserved  heterogeneity  in the measurement.  These 
estimates  match neatly those in the main analysis:  treated  anxious  females,  who attempt  more questions  after treatment,  
also increase  their score of correct  answers  by a similar  proportion.  As cognitive  attentional  resources  are restored  by the 
CBM treatment,  anxious  (female)  participants  are able to attempt  more questions  in a given time and consequently  achieve  
better scores in the cognitive  test. The results in Table SM.9 (Panel A) suggest  that CBM may not change  the performance  
ranking  of the average  woman  but it may improve  the performance  ranking  of anxious  women.  Taken together,  these results 
suggest  that anxious  females  are those who beneﬁt  most from CBM treatment.  
We also conduct  a number  of robustness  tests. First, one might worry that students  in science-  and mathematics-based  
study programs  21 are more accustomed  to tests similar  to the task used in the laboratory  sessions  and hence perform  better 
than students  from other disciplines.  This would bias our results within gender  if the students  in science  and mathematics  
programs  were also disproportionally  represented  in the treatment  group. This is not the case for either females  or males 
(see Tables SM.2 for females  and SM.3 for males in SM). Controlling  for enrollment  in a science/mathematics  program  as an 
indicator  in a robustness  test does not change  the results (Table SM.10, columns  1 and 2, in SM). 22 
Second,  we cannot exclude  that the length of higher education  experience  has an impact  on performance  via other 
channels  – through,  for example,  “training” students  to be more resilient  to anxiety  – which  may interact  with the effect 
of CBM and be correlated  with participation  in the experiment  (but not the treatment  allocation  which was randomized).  23 
When we restrict  the sample  to ﬁrst-year  students,  for whom the effect of education  training  is minimal  since they had been 
in higher education  for about one month at the start of the CBM training,  we still observe  an impact  on treated  females  
(Table SM.10, columns  3 and 4.). 
21 These include Biology, Medicine,  Life Sciences,  Geology Architecture,  Engineering,  Computer  Science, Business  and Economics,  Management  of Technol-  
ogy. 
22 Note that female participants  in humanities  programs  have a higher average number of attempted  questions  at baseline compared  with females in 
science- and mathematics-based  degrees, while it is the opposite  for males. Since it is arguably  harder to increase performance  when starting from a 
higher baseline value and females are over-represented  in humanities  degrees, our main results are likely to be attenuated.  
23 We observe a higher number of participants  from ﬁrst-year  bachelor  students  (39%) than from second- and third-year  and Master’s students.  
9 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Table 3 
CBM impact on changes in attempted  questions  in cognitive  test by trait anxiety and by gender. 
Female sample Low anxiety High anxiety Low anxiety High anxiety 
CBM 0.458 1.594 ∗∗0.499 1.642 ∗∗
(0.606) (0.728) (0.703) (0.780) 
Age –0.098 0.038 
(0.154) (0.187) 
Trait anxiety –1.157 0.288 
(pre-treatment)  (0.953) (1.075) 
Trait anxiety 0.015 –0.002 
(squared)  (0.014) (0.010) 
Constant  2.971 ∗∗∗2.406 ∗∗∗26.959 –9.064 
(0.392) (0.471) (17.308)  (28.713)  
R 2 0.007 0.068 0.078 0.121 
N 69 62 69 62 
Mean /Delta1Attempted  (control)  2.97 2.40 2.97 2.40 
Male sample Low anxiety High anxiety Low anxiety High anxiety 
CBM 0.242 –0.248 0.698 0.080 
(0.585) (0.734) (0.767) (0.736) 
Age 0.255 ∗∗0.457 ∗∗∗
(0.112) (0.171) 
Trait anxiety 2.004 ∗–0.706 
(pre-treatment)  (1.079) (0.784) 
Trait anxiety –0.030 0.006 
(squared)  (0.017) (0.008) 
Constant  2.758 ∗∗∗2.933 ∗∗∗–36.158 ∗12.487 
(0.331) (0.482) (17.340)  (20.327)  
R 2 0.002 0.002 0.143 0.149 
N 65 65 65 65 
Mean /Delta1Attempted  (control)  2.75 2.93 2.75 2.93 
Note: The table shows the CBM impact on (changes  in) attempted  questions  in the Raven’s Matri- 
ces test between  pre- and post-treatment  estimated  according  to equation  2 (adjusted  for covari- 
ates) by anxious and non-anxious  type. A subject is classiﬁed  in the group of ‘High anxiety’ if her 
Trait Anxiety score is higher than the median Trait Anxiety within her gender group, otherwise  
the subject is classiﬁed  in the group ‘Low anxiety’. Estimations  are based on OLS regressions.  Stan- 
dard errors are bootstrapped  with 150 replications  and reported  in brackets.  Levels of signiﬁcance:  
* p < 0 . 1 , ** p < 0 . 05 , *** p < 0 . 01 . 
Several  additional  robustness  tests are presented  in the SM. We test the possibility  that confounding  effects attributable  
to observations  coming  from the tails of the outcome  distribution  (within  gender)  might be impacting  the results.  Table 
SM.7 in the SM reports  the treatment  effect on a “trimmed” sample  from which observations  equal or below the 5th per- 
centile and equal or above the 95th percentile  of the (pre-treatment)  outcome  distribution  (within  gender)  are excluded.  
The cost of trimming  is a reduction  in statistical  power. However,  the magnitude  of the treatment  effect is unaltered  across 
speciﬁcations  and is very similar  to the regressions  using the full sample.  
Despite  the treatment  randomization,  one may worry about the inﬂuence  of unaccounted  unobservables.  Table SM.8 in 
the SM presents  evidence  on how strong the selection  on unobservables  would need to be in order to reduce the coeﬃcient  
of the treatment  effect to zero using the methods  suggested  by Altonji et al. (2005) and Oster (2019) . Both Altonji’s  and 
Oster’s ratios statistics  are negative  for both female and male samples.  Negative  ratios arise when the observable  controls  
are on average  negatively  correlated  with the treatment  and positively  with the outcome  (or vice-versa).  The test assumes  
the unobservables  have the same pattern  of correlation  as the included  variables.  The tests negative  ratios suggest  that our 
estimates  are attenuated  towards  zero by unobservable  characteristics  (i.e. the estimates  are downward  biased).  
To determine  whether  the impact  of CBM training  is long-lived  and improves  actual examination  performance,  we col- 
lected the participants’  examination  results in the exam session  which took place about three months  after the follow-up  
data collection.  24 Examination  results have a low variability  and we do not observe  a signiﬁcant  impact  on average  grade. 
However,  the negative  correlation  between  trait anxiety  and university  examination  results that exists among  females  in 
the control  group is absent in the treatment  group three months  after the training.  This suggests  that the intervention  may 
generate  long-lasting  beneﬁts  ( Table 4 ). 
24 On approval  by the student faculties of aﬃliation,  we were able to retrieve examination  data for 136 subjects (52% of the original sample of participants)  
directly from faculty administration  oﬃces. The data were assembled  by a member of staff at the University  of Lausanne.  The authors never had access to 
any personal  data available  to the administration  oﬃces that could be used to link the students  in our sample to their examination  data and do not own 
the examination  data. 
10 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
Table 4 
Long term effects of CBM on correlation  be- 
tween university  exam grades and anxiety trait 
scores. 
Male Female 
Treatment  group: 
Correlation  0.031 –0.125 
(p-value)  (0.877) (0.475) 
Tracked subjects 27 35 
Average exam grades 4.117 4.159 
SD of exam grades 1.022 1.219 
Control Group: 
Correlation  0.152 –0.339 
(p-value)  (0.479) (0.072) 
Tracked subjects 24 29 
Average exam grade 4.375 4.446 
SD of exam grades 0.87 0.551 
Note: The table shows the Pearson’s  correlation  
(corr) between  trait anxiety scores and univer- 
sity exam grades (averaged  across exam sat) by 
treatment  and control group and by sex (sam- 
ple of N = 136). The correlation’s  p-values are 
reported  in brackets.  ‘tracked subjects’  indicate 
the number of subject for whom we were able 
to receive exam data. 
6. Conclusions  
Lower performance  in cognitive  tasks is associated  with attention  bias towards  negative  stimuli.  Attention  bias is associ-  
ated to anxiety  and has a detrimental  effect on performance  because  it diverts  cognitive  resources  away from the completion  
of a task. We randomized  an antianxiety  digital treatment,  cognitive  bias manipulation  (CBM), that aims at reducing  atten- 
tion bias. Existing  studies  focused  on pathologically  anxious  subjects,  whereas  the participants  of our experiment  are college  
students.  
The results show that CBM reduces  attention  bias and improves  the cognitive  performance  of females  in the treatment  
group. The magnitude  of the impact  is large (37% increase  in performance)  and is associated  to the more anxious  females  
in the sample.  There is no signiﬁcant  effect for males. Since according  to medical  statistics  anxiety  prevalence  is higher in 
females  on average,  these results suggest  the potential  for cognitive  bias modiﬁcation  to be an effective  way to reduce the 
detrimental  effects of anxiety  on cognitive  performance  and the resulting  gender  disparities  in opportunities.  
Future studies  may seek to replicate  these results and analyze  hypotheses  that we were unable to test due to lack of 
data. One hypothesis,  suggested  by an anonymous  referee,  concerns  a differential  reaction  in latencies  to stimuli  when the 
face shown corresponds  with the sex of the respondent.  This would be a useful addition  to the current  results because,  if 
it is the case that the participant’s  latency  responds  better to same-gender  faces, then CBM training  programs  can be easily 
personalized  to increase  their effectiveness.  
CBM interventions  are shorter,  cheaper  and more easily administered  than alternative  available  treatments,  such as cog- 
nitive behavioral  therapy  and medications.  As an illustration,  a private  session  of CBT currently  costs between  £40 and £100, 
according  to NHS statistics,  whereas  the administration  of CBM, once programmed,  can run at almost zero marginal  costs. 
Declarations  of Competing  Interest  
None. 
Acknowledgments  
We are very grateful  to Anina Eggenberger  and Christian  Zehnder  for their assistance  throughout  the study and the 
data analysis.  We thank Ron Smith, Ben Groom  and participants  at the 6 th Annual  Meeting  of the French Experimental  
Economics  Association,  the IMEBESS  conference  in Florence,  the Barcelona  Graduate  Summer  Forum and seminars  at King’s 
College  London,  the University  of Lausanne  and Middlesex  University  of London.  
Supplementary  material  
Supplementary  material  associated  with this article can be found, in the online version,  at doi: 10.1016/j.euroecorev.2020.  
103636  . 
11 E. Cavatorta,  S. Grassi and M. Lambiris European  Economic  Review 132 (2021) 103636 
References  
Alan, S. , Boneva, T. , Ertac, S. , 2019. Ever failed, try again, succeed better: results from a randomized  educational  intervention  on grit. Q. J. Econ. 134 (3), 
1121–1162  . 
Altonji, J.G. , Elder, T.E. , Taber, C.R. , 2005. Selection  on observed  and unobserved  variables:  assessing  the effectiveness  of catholic schools. J. Political Econ. 
113 (1), 151 . 
Beard, C. , 2011. Cognitive  bias modiﬁcation  for anxiety: current evidence  and future directions.  Expert Rev. Neurother.  11 (2), 299–311 . 
Blattman,  C. , Jamison, J.C. , Sheridan,  M. , 2017. Reducing  crime and violence:  experimental  evidence  from cognitive  behavioral  therapy in liberia. Am. Econ. 
Rev. 107 (4), 1165–1206  . 
Borghans,  L. , Duckworth,  A.L. , Heckman,  J.J. , Ter Weel, B. , 2008. The economics  and psychology  of personality  traits. J. Hum. Resour. 43 (4), 972–1059  . 
Cahlíková,  J., Cingl, L., Levely, I., 2019. How stress affects performance  and competitiveness  across gender. Manage. Sci. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2019.3400  . forth- 
coming 
Coffman,  K.B. , 2014. Gender differences  in willingness  to guess. Manage. Sci. 60 (2), 434–448  . 
Das-Munshi,  J., Goldberg,  D., Bebbington,  P.E., Bhugra, D.K., Brugha, T.S., Dewey, M.E., Jenkins, R., Stewart, R., Prince, M., 2008. Public health signiﬁcance  of 
mixed anxiety and depression:  beyond current classiﬁcation.  Br. J. Psychiatry  192 (3), 171–177.  doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.036707  . 
Derakshan,  N. , Eysenck,  M.W. , 2009. Anxiety, processing  eﬃciency,  and cognitive  performance:  new developments  from attentional  control theory. Eur. 
Psychol. 14 (2), 168–176 . 
Eldar, S. , Bar-Haim,  Y. , 2010. Neural plasticity  in response  to attention  training in anxiety. Psychol. Med. 40 (04), 667–677  . 
Eysenck,  M.W. , Derakshan,  N. , 2011. New perspectives  in attentional  control theory. Pers. Individ. Dif. 50 (7), 955–960  . 
Fischbacher,  U. , 2007. Z-tree: zurich toolbox for ready-made  economic  experiments.  Exp. Econ. 10 (2), 171–178 . 
Goeleven,  E. , De Raedt, R. , Leyman, L. , Verschuere,  B. , 2008. The karolinska  directed emotional  faces: a validation  study. Cognit. Emotion 22 (6), 1094–1118  . 
Guiso, L. , Monte, F. , Sapienza,  P. , Zingales,  L. , 2008. Culture, gender, and math. Science (5880) 1164–1165  . 
Hakamata,  Y. , Lissek, S. , Bar-Haim,  Y. , Britton, J.C. , Fox, N.A. , Leibenluft,  E. , Ernst, M. , Pine, D.S. ,2 0 1 0 . Attention  bias modiﬁcation  treatment:  a meta-analysis  
toward the establishment  of novel treatment  for anxiety. Biol. Psychiatry  68 (11), 982–990  . 
Krosnick,  J.A. , Alwin, D.F. , 1989. Aging and susceptibility  to attitude change.. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 57 (3), 416 . 
Li, S. , Tan, J. , Qian, M. , Liu, X. , 2008. Continual  training of attentional  bias in social anxiety. Behav. Res. Ther. 46 (8), 905–912  . 
Lundqvist,  D. , Flykt, A. , Öhman, A. , 1998. The karolinska  directed emotional  faces (KDEF). CD ROM from Department  of Clinical Neuroscience,  Psychology  
section, Karolinska  Institutet  91–630 . 
MacLeod,  C. , Mathews,  A. , Tata, P. , 1986. Attentional  bias in emotional  disorders.  J. Abnorm.  Psychol. 95 (1), 15 . 
McManus,  S. , Bebbington,  P. , Jenkins, R. , Brugha, T. , 2016. Mental health and wellbeing  in England:  Adult psychiatric  morbidity  survey 2014. Leeds: NHS 
Digital . 
Moutaﬁ, J. , Furnham,  A. , Tsaousis,  I. , 2006. Is the relationship  between  intelligence  and trait neuroticism  mediated  by test anxiety?  Pers. Individ. Dif. 40 (3), 
587–597  . 
Oster, E. , 2019. Unobservable  selection  and coeﬃcient  stability:  theory and evidence.  J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 37 (2), 187–204  . 
Paserman,  M.D. , 2007. Gender differences  in performance  in competitive  environments:  evidence  from professional  tennis players. IZA Discuss. Pap. . 
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., Court, J. H., 2003. Manual for Raven’s Progressive  Matrices  and Vocabulary  Scales: Section 1: general overview.  
Rear, D. , 2019. One size ﬁts all? the limitations  of standardised  assessment  in critical thinking.  Assess. Eval. Higher Educ. 44 (5), 664–675  . 
Remes, O., Brayne, C., Linde, R., Lafortune,  L., 2016. A systematic  review of reviews on the prevalence  of anxiety disorders  in adult populations.  Brain Behav. 
6 (7), e00497. doi: 10.1002/brb3.497  . 
Salemink,  E. , van den Hout, M. , Kindt, M. , 2009. Effects of positive interpretive  bias modiﬁcation  in highly anxious individuals.  J. Anxiety Disord. 23 (5), 
676–683  . 
See, J. , Macleod,  C. , Bridle, R. , 2009. Attentional  bias: a real-world  study using a home-based  cognitive  bias modiﬁcation  procedure.  J. Abnormal  Ps 118 (1), 
65–75 . 
Spielberger,  C.D. , 1980. Test Anxiety Inventory.  Wiley Online Library . 
Stansfeld,  S. , Clark, C. , Bebbington,  P. , King, M. , Jenkins, R. , Hinchliffe,  S. , 2016. ’Chapter 2: Common  mental disorders’  in McManus  S, Bebbington  P, Jenkins 
R, Brugha T. (eds), mental health and wellbeing  in england:  Adult psychiatric  morbidity  survey 2014. Leeds: NHS Digital . 
Twenge, J.M. , Gentile, B. , DeWall, C.N. , Ma, D. , Laceﬁeld,  K. , Schurtz, D.R. , 2010. Birth cohort increases  in psychopathology  among young americans,  
1938–2007:  a cross-temporal  meta-analysis  of the mmpi. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 30 (2), 145–154 . 
Wilson, E. , MacLeod,  C. , 2003. Contrasting  two accounts  of anxiety-linked  attentional  bias: selective  attention  to varying levels of stimulus  threat intensity.  
J. Abnorm.  Psychol. 112 (2), 212–218 . 
Yiend, J. , Mackintosh,  B. , Mathews,  A. , 2005. Enduring  consequences  of experimentally  induced biases in interpretation.  Behav. Res. Ther. 43 (6), 779–797  . 
Zvielli, A. , Bernstein,  A. , Koster, E.H.W. , 2014. Dynamics  of attentional  bias to threat in anxious adults: Bias towards and/or away? PLoS ONE (8) . 
12 