International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
Digital Training for Non-Specialist Health Workers
to Deliver a Brief Psychological Treatment for
Depression in Primary Care in India: Findings
from a Randomized Pilot Study
Shital S. Muke1
, Deepak T ugnawat1, Udita Joshi1
, Aditya Anand1, Azaz Khan1,
Ritu Shrivastava1, Abhishek Singh1, Juliana L. Restivo2
, Anant Bhan1, Vikram Patel2,3and
John A. Naslund2,*
1Sangath, 120 Deepak Society, Chuna Bhatti, Kolar Road, Bhopal 462016, India;
shital.muke@sangath.in (S.S.M.); deepak.tugnawat@sangath.in (D.T.); udita.joshi@sangath.in (U.J.);
aditya.a@sangath.in (A.A.); azaz.khan@sangath.in (A.K.); ritu.shrivastava@sangath.in (R.S.);
abhishek.singh@sangath.in (A.S.); anant.bhan@sangath.in (A.B.)
2Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Juliana_Restivo@hms.harvard.edu (J.L.R.); vikram_patel@hms.harvard.edu (V .P .)
3Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115, USA
*Correspondence: john_naslund@hms.harvard.edu
Received: 30 June 2020; Accepted: 28 August 2020; Published: 1 September 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Introduction : Task sharing holds promise for scaling up depression care in countries such as
India, yet requires training large numbers of non-specialist health workers. This pilot trial evaluated
the feasibility and acceptability of a digital program for training non-specialist health workers to
deliver a brief psychological treatment for depression. Methods : Participants were non-specialist health
workers recruited from primary care facilities in Sehore, a rural district in Madhya Pradesh, India.
A three-arm randomized controlled trial design was used, comparing digital training alone (DGT) to
digital training with remote support (DGT +), and conventional face-to-face training. The primary
outcome was the feasibility and acceptability of digital training programs. Preliminary e ectiveness
was explored as changes in competency outcomes, assessed using a self-reported measure covering
the speciﬁc knowledge and skills required to deliver the brief psychological treatment for depression.
Outcomes were collected at pre-training and post-training. Results : Of 42 non-specialist health
workers randomized to the training programs, 36 including 10 (72%) in face-to-face, 12 (86%) in DGT,
and 14 (100%) in DGT +arms started the training. Among these participants, 27 (64%) completed the
training, with 8 (57%) in face-to-face, 8 (57%) in DGT, and 11 (79%) in DGT +. The addition of remote
telephone support appeared to improve completion rates for DGT +participants. The competency
outcome improved across all groups, with no signiﬁcant between-group di erences. However,
face-to-face and DGT +participants showed greater improvement compared to DGT alone. There
were numerous technical challenges with the digital training program such as poor connectivity,
smartphone app not loading, and di culty navigating the course content—issues that were further
emphasized in follow-up focus group discussions with participants. Feedback and recommendations
collected from participants informed further modiﬁcations and reﬁnements to the training programs
in preparation for a forthcoming large-scale e ectiveness trial. Conclusions : This study adds to
mounting e orts aimed at leveraging digital technology to increase the availability of evidence-based
mental health services in primary care settings in low-resource settings.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368; doi:10.3390 /ijerph17176368 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijerphInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 2 of 22
Keywords: depression; psychological treatment; task sharing; primary care; pilot study; non-specialist
health worker; training; digital technology; mental health
1. Introduction
According to the global burden of disease study, nearly 200 million people were living with
mental disorders in India by 2017, which represents 14.3% of the total population of the country [ 1].
This includes over 45 million people living with depressive disorder, the leading mental health
contributor to the global disease burden, comprising approximately 3.3% of the total population of
the country [ 1]. The National Mental Health Survey of India 2015–16 found that the prevalence of
depression was about 2.7% and the lifetime prevalence was 5.3% in the study population [ 2]. Several
studies have reported a signiﬁcant gap between those living with depression and those who have
access to adequate care [ 3,4]. The National Mental Health Survey estimated that the care gap for
current depression was 79.1% [2], while in some regions of the country this gap exceeds 90% [5].
The World Health Organization’s (WHO) Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP)
recommends brief psychological interventions as ﬁrst-line treatments for depression [ 6]. However,
access to brief psychological treatments remains a signiﬁcant challenge, particularly in lower-income
countries like India. This is partly due to the limited number of available specialist providers to deliver
these treatments or supervise care, as well as to train other therapists [ 7,8]. Task sharing involves
building the capacity of non-specialist health workers, which include a broad range of frontline health
workers who do not have specialized training in mental health care, to deliver brief evidence-based
psychological treatments for common mental disorders [ 9]. This approach appears to be a key strategy
to address the care gap for depression, as reﬂected by mounting evidence that non-specialist health
workers can e ectively deliver brief psychological treatments for depression across a range of lower
resource settings [10–12].
In India, the formation of the National Mental Health Policy of India in 2014 [ 13] and enforcement
of the Mental Health Care Act 2017 [ 14], as well as revised guidelines of the National Mental Health
Program (NMHP) [ 15], are major drivers at the policy and health system level for expanding and
integrating mental health services in primary health care [ 16]. These recent legislative developments
have highlighted the importance of task sharing as being critical to achieving universal coverage
of basic mental health services. A major barrier to the successful implementation and scale up of
task sharing is the need to adequately train su cient non-specialist health workers to deliver brief
psychological treatments and to ensure that this workforce achieves the necessary clinical competencies
to sustain delivery of high-quality care [17–19].
In India, conventional face-to-face residential training requiring extended stays at government
training facilities is the typical approach for training non-specialist health workers, such as ASHAs
(Accredited Social Health Activists) through the National Health Mission [ 20–23]. However, there
are ﬁnancial and logistical challenges, such as the need for expert trainers to lead the training,
as well as the requirement of signiﬁcant travel across long distances for participants to attend the
training [ 7,24]. Therefore, this method of training health workers is limited by poor scalability.
The increasing availability and use of digital technologies, such as smartphones, among non-specialist
health workers o er new opportunities to support training and skill-building without requiring
in-person instruction [ 25,26]. For instance, mobile internet penetration continues to increase rapidly in
many low-resource countries, with close to 450 million people in 2020 in India having internet access
from their phones [ 27]. While many frontline health workers do not have access to or own smartphones,
this is changing in several parts of India as government health systems are now providing smartphones
to health workers to support them in their work [28,29].
To date, there have been promising initial e orts demonstrating the feasibility of using digital
technology as a tool for enhancing in-person training programs for non-specialist health workersInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 3 of 22
in a low-resource setting in rural Pakistan [ 30]. Additionally, prior studies have demonstrated
promising ﬁndings using digital technology to support task-sharing mental health services in
low-resource settings through the use of digital tools for diagnosis, guiding clinical decision making, and
facilitating supervision [ 25]. Speciﬁcally in India, recent studies have reported on a successful digital
decision-support platform for supporting community health workers and primary care providers in the
screening, diagnosis, and management of common mental disorders [ 31]; the use of an Android app with
tailored video content for training community volunteers about mental health, connecting individuals
with available services, and raising awareness [ 32]; and the initial feasibility and acceptability of a
digital game accessible from a smartphone app involving a problem-solving intervention for adolescent
mental health [ 33]. These studies highlight the viability and promise of digital interventions for mental
health in low-resource settings such as India; however, there remains an immediate need to generate
evidence on the feasibility, acceptability, and potential e ectiveness of using a fully remote digital
training program delivered on a smartphone application to non-specialist health workers in a rural
area of a low-resource setting.
In earlier formative research, we demonstrated the interest in using digital technology for accessing
a training program to deliver a brief psychological treatment for depression among non-specialist
health workers in Madhya Pradesh, India [ 34]. We found that a digital platform was feasible for use
among non-specialist health workers, and through a series of focus group discussions, we gained
valuable stakeholder insights about what features could make a digital training program interesting
and appealing for this target group. Speciﬁcally, participants provided suggestions for simplifying
the language in the program contents and materials, and using familiar terms tailored to the local
context; they also recommended adding more images or graphics and interactive features to create
a more engaging training program [ 34]. Drawing from these ﬁndings, our team developed a digital
program for training non-specialist health workers to deliver the Healthy Activity Program (HAP),
a brief evidence-based psychological treatment for depression in primary care [35].
Our next step, and primary objective of this pilot study, was to determine the feasibility and
acceptability of this digital training program compared to conventional face-to-face training. In this pilot
study, our goal was to collect data on the use of the digital training, such as navigating the smartphone
app and accessing the training content, as well as participant feedback to inform reﬁnements to the
digital training as well as our study procedures in preparation for a larger fully powered e ectiveness
trial. Speciﬁcally, we conducted this three-arm randomized pilot trial to explore the acceptability and
feasibility of two digital training programs (digital training alone and digital training with remote
support), and to explore changes in competency outcomes compared to conventional face-to-face
training for non-specialist health workers, to deliver the evidence-based HAP treatment for depression
in Sehore, a rural district in Madhya Pradesh, India.
We included a third arm in this pilot study to test the use of remote support for enhancing
engagement and completion of the digital training program. Our rationale for using remote support
stems from the existing online education literature highlighting that additional support can promote
participant engagement and completion in online learning programs [ 36,37]. While this study was
primarily focused on determining the feasibility and acceptability of the digital training program,
we also collected a measure of competency to assess preliminary e ectiveness, which was deﬁned by
the acquisition of the knowledge and skills required to deliver HAP .
2. Material and Methods
This exploratory three-arm randomized pilot study followed the extension of CONSORT guidelines
to pilot studies [ 38]. In this study, non-specialist health workers were recruited from three community
health centers (i.e., Doraha, Bilkishganj, and Shyampur) in the Sehore district of Madhya Pradesh,
India. This study site was selected because Sangath, the research organization leading this project,
has a close partnership and an established Memorandum of Understanding with the state government.
Additionally, the goal was to create a model of depression care that could be successfully delivered byInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 4 of 22
non-specialist health workers in Sehore district and then scaled up to other districts in the state, and also
to other regions of India. Madhya Pradesh is a large, centrally located state with over 72 million people,
of which nearly 73% reside in rural areas [ 39]. Relative to many other Indian states, Madhya Pradesh
ranks lower with respect to human development and availability of resources [ 40,41]. According to the
2016 National Mental Health Survey of India, the care gap for mental disorders in Madhya Pradesh
exceeds 90% [ 5]. Ethics review boards at Sangath, India (VP_2017_028), and Harvard Medical School,
USA (IRB17-0092), approved all study procedures.
2.1. Sample
The target sample for this pilot trial was 45 non-specialist health workers. This sample size was
considered su cient for achieving our primary goal of assessing acceptability and feasibility of the
training programs [ 42] and was also selected to ensure we had the minimum number of participants
for in-person instruction in the face-to-face training ( n=15). The sample included Accredited Social
Health Activists (ASHAs), ASHA Facilitators and Multi-Purpose Health Workers (MPWs) employed
in the National Health Mission (Madhya Pradesh state) in India. ASHAs are all women, and a cadre
of community health workers in India, introduced by the National Health Mission (NHM) in 2005
with the goal to serve as health activists in the community, create awareness on health and its social
determinants, as well as to mobilize the community especially marginalized populations to increase
utilization and accountability of the existing health services [ 43]. Each ASHA covers a population of
1000 and receives performance-based and service-based incentives as compensation for facilitating
immunization, referral, and escort services for institutional deliveries [ 44]. ASHA Facilitators work
as a support mechanism to ASHAs to provide mentoring and support and to monitor performance.
One ASHA Facilitator typically works with 10 to 20 ASHAs [ 43]. MPWs are male health workers
who are appointed primarily for the control of communicable diseases and are a key functionary at
Sub-Health Centers, which are the most peripheral health facilities covering a population of 5000 to
deliver preventative health services to the community [43].
Eligible non-specialist health workers who met the inclusion criteria of having age 18 years
(the minimum age required for employment by the National Health Mission [ 22,45]); being a certiﬁed
non-specialist health worker (i.e., ASHA, ASHA Facilitator, or MPW); having a minimum education
level of 8th standard (i.e., to ensure they can read and write to access the digital program, written
training materials, and complete study assessments); willing to provide written informed consent;
and, willing to complete the full training program and stay in the study area during the pilot trial
period. Non-specialist health workers were excluded if they had participated in prior formative
research activities conducted by our research team (due to prior exposure to the training content),
which we conﬁrmed by referring to the list of non-specialist health workers provided by a National
Health Mission o cial in the district (see below), or if they had signiﬁcant speech, sight, or hearing
impairment, or were unable to read or write. Smartphone ownership was not required to participate,
as participants were provided with a smartphone to access the digital training programs.
2.2. Recruitment Procedure
A district National Health Mission o cial provided the list of non-specialist health workers from
the three community health centers. Community health centers represent secondary level health
services facilities designed to provide referrals as well as specialist care to rural populations [ 46,47].
We screened the list containing 377 health workers based on the criteria of age (18 years and above),
education (8th standard and above), and non-participation in earlier formative research activities.
We found a total of 302 potentially eligible health workers. From this list, our data manager randomly
selected 92 potentially eligible health workers using the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)
software [ 48]. Research assistants then contacted these potentially eligible health workers by phone to
conﬁrm their interest and availability to participate in this pilot study.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 5 of 22
Potentially eligible non-specialist health workers were invited to attend a group information
session at a nearby community health center to learn more about the study. The research team organized
the group information session to describe the purpose of the study and to inform participants that this
study involves collaboration with the National Health Mission. The information session also served
as a way to explain what the training involves, the study procedures, and the pre- and post-training
assessments. This was also an opportunity for participants to ask questions about the study, and to
emphasize that their decision to participate was completely voluntary. After the group information
session, non-specialist health workers who expressed interest in participating conﬁrmed their eligibility
criteria (age and education), and were provided with an information sheet and completed individual
written-informed consent. During the individual consent process, health workers were informed that
their decision to participate or withdraw from the study at any time would not have any adverse
consequences on their current standing as a health worker or their employment status, and that any
data collected during the study would be kept conﬁdential and that no identiﬁable results would be
shared with the health system or others outside the research team.
2.3. Randomization
Participants were randomly allocated to one of three training programs based on stratiﬁcation
variables of age, education, and type of non-specialist health worker (i.e., ASHA, ASHA Facilitator,
MPW). The study data manager conducted the randomization using the randomizer package available
in R software. The age range of recruited ASHAs (24–42 years), ASHA Facilitators (31–46 years), and
MPWs (39–52 years) varied widely, hence it was decided to keep di erent cut-o points for stratiﬁcation
based on the average age for each category of health worker. Two strata for age variables for ASHAs
were age 35 and age >35; for ASHA Facilitators were age 37 and age >37; and for MPWs were age
47 and age >47. Similarly, stratiﬁcation for education for ASHAs was 8th standard and >8th standard;
for ASHA Facilitators was 8–12th standard and >12th standard; and for MPWs was 8–12th standard
and>12th standard. In total, there were 12 strata to maintain a balance of participant characteristics
across study arms. This also served as an opportunity to pilot test our randomization procedures in
preparation for the forthcoming larger trial.
2.4. Training Programs
The training programs in this study were designed to provide instruction to non-specialist health
workers to gain the clinical skills and competencies necessary to deliver the Healthy Activity Program
(HAP) for treatment of depression [ 49]. The HAP is an evidence-based brief psychological treatment for
depression designed and tested in Goa, India, that has demonstrated e ectiveness and cost-e ectiveness
in primary care settings in India [ 35], as well as sustained clinical beneﬁts [ 50]. The success of the HAP
for treating depression has also been demonstrated in other lower-resource contexts, including among
people receiving treatment for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis [ 51] and people with severe depression
in primary care settings in Nepal [ 52], and as part of recent e orts to scale up mental health services
in Madhya Pradesh [ 53]. The HAP consists of two manuals covering general counseling skills and
treatment speciﬁc skills. These manuals are open source and available online (http: //www.sangath.in /).
These manuals were adapted to the local context of Madhya Pradesh and converted into digital and
F2F training programs (i.e., covering the same content using di erent teaching strategies). In this pilot
study, we compared three di erent training programs: conventional face-to-face (F2F) training; digital
training (DGT); and digital training with remote support (DGT +).
2.4.1. Conventional Face-to-Face Training (F2F)
The conventional F2F training consists of a six-day classroom training facilitated by two
experienced counselors with certiﬁcation as Master Trainers, meaning that they have signiﬁcant
experience delivering the HAP to patients with depression in clinical settings, have completed
instruction in being an e ective trainer, and have provided training to other health workers in theInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 6 of 22
delivery of the HAP . This conventional in-person training is considered the ‘gold-standard’ in training
non-specialist health workers based on the prior methods employed in the evaluation and delivery of
the HAP treatment [ 35]. The six-day training is hosted in a community setting and follows the content
in the HAP manuals. This form of in-person training is consistent with the type of training currently
available to non-specialist health workers in the district.
2.4.2. Digital Training (DGT)
DGT consists of a digitized version of the HAP manuals hosted on the Moodle Learning
Management System and accessible through a smartphone app [ 54]. The training program content
was divided across 16 modules following the same structure as the F2F instruction. The modules
consisted of expert lecture videos, role-play videos showing clinical scenarios, PowerPoint presentations,
reading materials, interactive quizzes embedded within the modules, and assessment questions at
the end of each module. Duration of digital training content was matched to the duration of the
F2F training, and consisted of approximately 48 h, covering the time required to view the content,
read the accompanying materials, and complete the interactive quizzes and assessment questions.
Participants were provided with a smartphone to access the training program and were invited to
attend a short orientation session to learn how to use the phone, access the instructional content through
the smartphone app, and navigate the Learning Management System interface. Participants were
provided with a 30-day window to complete the digital training. Throughout the training, participants
could contact our research team for technical assistance regarding any concerns or challenges with
using the smartphone or accessing the training program content.
2.4.3. Digital Training with Remote Support (DGT +)
The DGT +training program includes access to the same smartphone app, digital training content,
and technical support described above for the DGT program. DGT +included the addition of remote
support from the research team. This involved weekly phone calls from a research assistant to
participants. The purpose of the support phone calls was to check in with participants about their
progress with the training, and whether they had experienced any challenges or had questions about
the digital platform or program content. The research assistant also provided participants with
encouragement and praise during the calls as a way to motivate participants and support engagement
in the training.
2.5. Outcome Assessment
We collected outcomes on acceptability and feasibility of the training programs and preliminary
eectiveness of the training on competency outcomes. After informed consent, a unique participant ID
number was assigned to each participant. This number was used on all subsequent data collection
forms, with no participant name or identiﬁable information used on any of the data collection forms.
Prior to the outcome assessment, participants were informed of the purpose of using participant ID
numbers for their identiﬁcation throughout the study duration, rather than using their names. Study
outcomes were collected before and after the training using paper-based forms distributed in-person
at the community health center. The average duration of completing the outcome assessment was
approximately 2 h. We used paper-based forms instead of digital data collection to avoid giving an
unfair advantage to participants in the digital training programs, as the F2F training participants may
not have had equivalent exposure to use of digital technology. Members of our research team who
were blind to arm allocation, and who were not involved in the development of the training programs,
collected the outcome assessments.
2.5.1. Acceptability and Feasibility Indicators
We collected process indicators to determine participant engagement and use of each of the
training programs. This included: daily attendance at the F2F training; metrics collected from theInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 7 of 22
Learning Management System for the digital training programs (for both the DGT and DGT +programs),
including the number of days to complete the training program and the number of modules completed;
the number of phone calls made by the participants for seeking technical assistance (for both the
DGT and DGT +programs) from the research team; and the number of phone calls initiated by the
research team to participants for follow up with their queries and types of challenges or questions that
commonly were mentioned (for the DGT +only).
After completing the training (end line), we also collected a satisfaction and acceptability
questionnaire adapted from an existing measure of motivation and engagement in face-to-face and
online education programs called the MUSIC®model of motivation inventory [ 55–58]. The 26-item
questionnaire asks about the level of satisfaction with the training, acceptability of the content and
method of instruction, and feasibility of completing the training. The items are rated on a six-point
Likert scale, and relate to feasibility, acceptability, adoption, and appropriateness of the training
programs. The questionnaire was translated into Hindi and modiﬁed for the F2F and digital (DGT and
DGT+) training programs. The items are rated on a six-point Likert scale, with 1 being the lowest and
6 the highest score. The questionnaire covers the domains of acceptability, appropriateness, adoption,
and feasibility. The average score of each domain was calculated by adding the score of all the items in
the domain divided by the number of questions in the domain.
We also conducted one focus group discussion for all the participants in each arm to obtain
feedback about the training and to ask questions pertaining to acceptability and appropriateness
of the content, methods of instruction, and engagement in the training, as well as the feasibility
of accessing and navigating the digital training platform on the smartphone app, and providing
recommendations for what could be improved in the training program. The focus group discussions
lasted about 45–60 min, were facilitated by a qualitative researcher and were audio-recorded for
analysis. Another researcher from our team observed the focus groups to collect ﬁeld notes to identify
key recommendations from participants for modifying the training programs.
2.5.2. Preliminary E ectiveness Outcome
Competency outcomes were collected before (baseline) and after (end line) the training to determine
the preliminary e ectiveness of the di erent training programs. Competency was assessed using a
questionnaire consisting of short clinical vignettes followed by multiple-choice questions covering the
core skills and competencies needed to deliver the HAP . The measure was based on prior research
showing that self-assessment can reliably assess therapist competency following training [ 24,59,60].
Three equivalent versions of the questionnaire were used to allow repeat testing. The measure focuses
on testing knowledge of the HAP treatment as well as applied knowledge of how to deliver the
treatment, an essential aspect of provider competence. This questionnaire is scored from 0 to 100,
with higher scores reﬂecting higher levels of knowledge and competency. The questionnaire was
translated into Hindi for this study, and modiﬁcations were made to ﬁt the local context, such as
simplifying complex or technical language and using local terms. Experienced counselors reviewed
the Hindi translation to ensure that it was appropriate for administering to non-specialist health
workers in the local context in Madhya Pradesh. To avoid “teaching to the test” [ 61], none of the
individuals involved in the development of the HAP training materials had access to the competency
assessment questionnaire.
2.6. Data Analysis
Descriptive statistics were computed for socio-demographic characteristics between the three
training programs. Process indicators and the satisfaction questionnaires were summarized in
tables. Field notes were collected during the focus group discussions to capture key feedback
for supporting reﬁnements to the programs. As this was a pilot study with the primary goal of
determining feasibility and acceptability of the training programs and to inform improvements to the
instructional content and delivery of the training programs, we did not conduct an in-depth thematicInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 8 of 22
analysis of the qualitative data. Rather, we followed guidance from the person-based approach to
intervention development [ 33,62], which enabled the combination of quantitative and qualitative
data to inform modiﬁcations to the training programs. Speciﬁcally, we used a framework analysis
approach [ 63] to guide our identiﬁcation of common topics within the qualitative data, following
a coding framework with the four core domains outlined from the satisfaction and acceptability
questionnaire (i.e., appropriateness, acceptability, adoption, and feasibility) [ 55]. One researcher
from our team who was not involved in the development of the training programs coded the
transcripts following this a priori framework and categorized key observations from participants
according to each of the broad domains. Two additional researchers from our team who supported
the development of the training programs reviewed the classiﬁcation of participants’ observations
and the key recommendations for improving the program. This second round of review provided
an opportunity to expand on any observations that were not clear, and to draw from the ﬁeld notes
to supplement the description of the recommendations. A fourth researcher who was external to
this process then reviewed the tables summarizing the qualitative feedback to ensure that actionable
steps could be identiﬁed for improving the usability and acceptability of the training programs in
preparation for a subsequent large scale randomized controlled e ectiveness study.
As part of an exploratory analysis of change in the competency assessment outcome, we used a
paired t-test to determine if there was a statistically signiﬁcant mean di erence between the competency
scores obtained before and after the training. We also explored pre- and post-training di erences in the
competency assessment scores within the three training programs using a non-parametric Wilcoxon
signed-rank test [ 64]. This method was selected to account for the small sample size. Due to the
heteroscedasticity, since the p-value for the Bartletts’s test for homogeneity of variance was less than
0.05, we used Welch’s one-way ANOVA test to determine if the change in competency assessment
scores obtained before and after the training program was di erent for the three arms, followed with
a Games–Howell post-hoc test. All analyses were completed using STATA (StataCorp LLC, College
Station, TX, USA), and p<0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.
3. Results
Out of 92 potentially eligible non-specialist health workers, we contacted a total of 73 until
reaching our recruitment target of 45. These 45 non-specialist health workers were invited to attend
the group information session to learn more about the study. As outlined in Figure 1, 42 consented and
enrolled in the study and were randomly allocated to the three study arms. This included 23 ASHAs,
10 ASHA Facilitators, and 9 MPWs. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1. Of the 42
enrolled participants, 36 started the training programs to which they were randomized ( n=10 in
F2F; n=12 in DGT; n=14 in DGT +) and 36 (86%) participants completed post-training assessments
(n=11 in F2F; n=12 in DGT; n=13 in DGT +). We found that there were no di erences in participant
baseline characteristics (such as type of health worker, mean age, education, and gender) between
those who completed the training compared with those who did not complete the training. No harms
were recorded for any participants throughout the duration of this pilot study.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 9 of 22
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 , 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 24 
  
 
Figure 1. Participant flow diagram. DGT: Digital Training. 
  
Figure 1. Participant ﬂow diagram. DGT: Digital Training.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 10 of 22
Table 1. Baseline socio-demographic characteristics of study participants.
Socio-Demographic CharacteristicsF2F
nDGT
nDGT +
n p-Value
n=14 n=14 n=14
Gender 1
Female 11 (79%) 11 (79%) 11 (79%)
Male 3 (21%) 3 (21%) 3 (21%)
Designation 1
ASHA 8 (57%) 7 (50%) 8 (57%)
ASHA Facilitator 3 (21%) 4 (29%) 3 (21%)
MPW 3 (21%) 3 (21%) 3 (21%)
Education 0.51
8th to 10th 8 (57%) 9 (64%) 6 (43%)
Above 10th 6 (43%) 5 (36%) 8 (57%)
Experience in years mean (95% CI) * 9.73 (6.71, 12.76) 8.96 (5.37, 12.55) 8.38 (5.32, 11.44) 0.8153
Age in years mean (95% CI) * 36.07 (31.34, 40.80) 37.71 (32.43, 42.99) 36 (31.31, 40.68) 0.8341
Type of mobile phone owned # 0.931
Ordinary mobile phone 7 (50%) 6 (43%) 6 (43%)
Smartphone 7 (50%) 7 (50%) 8 (57%)
Family Size (number of persons in household)
mean (95% CI)5.3 (4.19, 6.42) 4.85 (3.07,6.63) 5.35 (3.62, 7.09) 0.868
Previous Experience in Mental Health Training ** (n=11) ( n=12) ( n=14) 0.591
Yes 5 (46%) 8 (67%) 8 (57%)
No 6 (54%) 4 (33%) 6 (43%)
How many years before took part in the training
mean (95% CI) *3 (0.67, 5.32) 3 (2.22, 3.77) 3.13 (1.6, 4.66) 0.9814
# one missing value in DGT arm. * Means CIs are presented for continuous variables, counts for categorical
variables. ** The non-specialist health workers had previously learned about mental health issues associated with
domestic violence during their routine trainings. However, they have not received any formal training on delivering
brief psychological treatments for mental health problems such as depression. We collected the data for this question
after the baseline assessment; hence, the number of respondents is lower. F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training;
ASHA: Accredited Social Health Activists; MPW: Multi-Purpose Workers.
3.1. Acceptability and Feasibility Indicators
Process indicators are listed in Table 2. Six participants never started the training program, out of
which 5 were the MPWs and 1 was an ASHA. The reasons for not starting the training were largely due
to other work commitments, and other personal or family commitments. Further, several participants
(n=9) started the training but could not complete it. This was similarly due to other family or work
commitments, and inclement weather as the training happened during the monsoon season (making it
dicult to travel to the training facility for F2F participants). Thus, 27 (64%) participants completed
the full training program, with 8 (57%) in F2F, 8 (57%) in DGT, and 11 (79%) in DGT +. We observed
dierences in program completion between the di erent types of non-specialist health workers, where
16 (70%) ASHAs, 8 (80%) ASHA Facilitators, and 3 (33%) MPWs completed the training.
Table 2. Summary of process indicators across the three di erent training programs.
Number of ParticipantsF2F
(n=14)DGT
(n=14)DGT +
(n=14)
Started the training 10 (71%) 12 (86%) 14 (100%)
Completed the full training (all modules) 8 (57%) 8 (57%) 11 (79%)
Did not complete all of the modules in the training 2 (14%) 4 (29%) 3 (21%)
Number of phone calls made by participants for seeking technical assistance NA 149 57
Number of phone calls made by the research team to participants for follow
up on their queriesNA 106 87
F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training.
There were a total of 399 support calls related to technical assistance for the digital training
programs. Among the DGT participants, there were 255 calls. This involved calls made by the
participants and calls made by the research team to respond to the participants. In total, 58% of the
calls (149 out of 255) were from participants to the research team. While 42% of the calls (106 out of 255)Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 11 of 22
were from the research team in response to participants’ queries. For DGT +participants, the major
dierence was that our research team initiated the calls (as opposed to participants initiating calls).
Among DGT +participants, there were 144 calls. In total, our research team initiated 60% of the calls
(87 out of 144) to participants, while 40% of the calls (57 out of 144) were from participants to our
research team. The number of calls per participant ranged from 4 to 37. The calls primarily related to
technical challenges, as summarized in Table 3, such as poor connectivity, the mobile app not loading
or being deleted from the phone, and challenges with navigating the course content.
Table 3. Common technical challenges mentioned by participants during phone calls with the research
team in the digital training programs.
Registered Queries by Phone Speciﬁc Technical Challenges Encountered
Internet related Internet is not working
 There is no phone connectivity network in the area
 Internet speed is slow
 Internet data is over, should I recharge it
 Course is not opening even connecting on Wi-Fi
Smartphone handling related How to operate smartphone features
 Don’t know how to use a smartphone
 App has been deleted /removed from phone
Moodle Learning Management
System app related Got logged out from course
 The app is requiring me to enter the password
 The app is showing an error on the screen
 Videos are not opening in the app
 Quizzes are not showing up in the app
 Videos are running very slow, show continuous booting
Course navigation related How to attempt quizzes and in which order to attempt them
 How to erase the wrong answer if entered mistakenly in the
assessment quiz
 How to see in the app how much of the course is completed
 How to know what grades I have scored
 Completed all three given attempts but would like to attempt
more to increase my scores, how to do it
Smartphone hardware /software
related Phone screen has been broken
 Phone is lost
Table 4 summarizes participants’ responses to the satisfaction and acceptability questionnaire for
each training program. Mean score across the domains was generally 5 or greater (out of a possible score
of 6), indicating that participants rated the training programs favorably for feasibility, acceptability,
and adoption. Across study arms, appropriateness was ranked lowest, suggesting that additional
eorts are necessary to promote engagement with the program content. Findings from the focus group
discussions ( n=28 participants) were grouped within the same four domains from the satisfaction
and acceptability questionnaire, as highlighted in Table 5. Recommendations for improving the F2F
training including increasing the duration of the training and clarifying some of the training manual
content. For the digital training programs, the main recommendations were related to ensuring that
the entire course could be accessed o ine due to poor internet connectivity in the region, as well as
providing a more comprehensive orientation session at the beginning of the program to provide an
overview of the smartphone app and navigating the digital program interface, as well as extending the
availability of telephone support from the research team.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 12 of 22
Table 4. Participant ratings of satisfaction and acceptability with the training programs *.
Domains of Satisfaction and Acceptability (F2F and DGT)Study Arms
F2F
(n=11)DGT
(n=12)DGT +
(n=13)
Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD)
Acceptability 5.6 (0.44) 5.2 (1.10) 5.5 (0.52)
The instructor was available to answer my questions about the coursework (F2F). /I could ﬁnd answers to questions I had about the coursework (DGT). 5.6 (0.51) 5.1 (1.16) 5.5 (0.51)
The instructor was willing to assist me if I needed help in the course (F2F). /Answers to questions about the coursework were easy to understand (DGT). 5.4 (0.51) 5.3 (1.40) 5.2 (1.14)
The instructor cared about how well I did in this course (F2F). /The instructor in the recorded lecture cared about helping me to learn (DGT). 5.4 (1.26) 5.3 (1.21) 5.5 (0.66)
The instructor was respectful of me (F2F). /The instructor in the recorded lecture used a respectful tone (DGT). 5.7 (0.48) 5.3 (1.21) 5.5 (0.66)
The instructor was friendly (F2F). /The instructor in the recorded lecture used a friendly tone (DGT). 5.7 (0.48) 4.8 (1.40) 5.2 (1.16)
I believe that the instructor cared about my feelings (F2F). /The recorded lecture used familiar language and expressions (DGT). 5.6 (0.51) 5.4 (1.24) 5.8 (0.6)
Appropriateness 4.9 (0.57) 5.0 (0.74) 5.1 (0.64)
The coursework held my attention (F2F /DGT). 5.4 (0.51) 5.3 (0.65) 5.3 (1.10)
The instructional methods used in this course held my attention (F2F /DGT). 4.9 (1.59) 5.0 (1.27) 4.9 (1.38)
I enjoyed the instructional methods used in this course (F2F /DGT). 5.3 (0.48) 5.3 (0.98) 5.5 (0.77)
The instructional methods engaged me in the course (F2F /DGT). 2.7 (1.88) 3.3 (1.82) 4.0 (1.77)
I enjoyed completing the coursework (F2F /DGT). 5.7 (0.48) 5.3 (1.13) 5.5 (0.66)
The coursework was interesting to me (F2F /DGT). 5.5 (0.52) 5.6 (0.66) 5.5 (0.51)
Adoption 5.5 (0.38) 5.5 (0.79) 5.6 (0.43)
In general, the coursework was useful to me (F2F /DGT). 5.2 (0.42) 5.5 (0.52) 5.5 (0.51)
The coursework was beneﬁcial to me (F2F /DGT). 5.3 (0.48) 5.7 (0.65) 5.7 (0.48)
I found the coursework to be relevant to my future (F2F /DGT). 5.7 (0.48) 5.4 (0.79) 5.6 (0.50)
I will be able to use the knowledge I gained in this course (F2F /DGT). 5.6 (0.51) 5.4 (1.24) 5.6 (0.50)
The knowledge I gained in this course is important for my future (F2F /DGT). 5.6 (0.51) 5.6 (1.16) 5.6 (0.50)
Feasibility 5.2 (0.40) 5.4 (0.81) 5.5 (0.42)
I had the opportunity to decide for myself how to meet the course goals (F2F /DGT). 4.9 (1.10) 5.7 (0.49) 5.8 (0.43)
I was conﬁdent that I could succeed in the coursework (F2F /DGT). 5.1 (1.19) 5.3 (1.21) 5.6 (0.50)
I had the freedom to complete the coursework my own way (F2F /DGT). 5.4 (0.51) 5.3 (0.65) 5.8 (0.43)
I felt that I could be successful in meeting the academic challenges in this course (F2F /DGT). 5.3 (0.48) 5.2 (1.19) 5.2 (1.21)
I had options on how to achieve the goals of the course (F2F /DGT). 4.4 (1.26) 5.4 (0.79) 5.2 (1.09)
I was capable of getting a high grade in this course (F2F /DGT). 5.5 (0.52) 5.0 (1.53) 5.5 (0.66)
I had control over how I learned the course content (F2F /DGT). 5.0 (1.15) 5.2 (1.33) 5.5 (0.66)
Throughout the course, I felt that I could be successful on the coursework (F2F /DGT). 5.3 (0.48) 5.4 (1.16) 5.6 (0.51)
I had ﬂexibility in what I was allowed to do in this course (F2F /DGT). 5.5 (0.52) 5.8 (0.38) 5.6 (0.51)
* The satisfaction and acceptability questionnaire was adapted from an existing measure of motivation and engagement in education programs called the MUSIC®model of motivation
inventory [ 55–58]. The measure consists of 26 items and was tailored to the Face-to-Face (F2F) or digital (DGT) training and translated into Hindi for use in this study. The items are rated
on a six-point Likert scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest score. The questionnaire covers the domains of acceptability, appropriateness, adoption, and feasibility. The average
score of each domain was calculated by adding the score of all the items in the domain divided by the number of questions in the domain. F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 13 of 22
Table 5. Summary of key ﬁndings from the focus group discussions with participants in the three
training programs.
Focus Group
Discussion
ThemesF2F ( n=8) DGT ( n=9) and DGT +(n=11)
Acceptability
Facilitators Became aware about depression; before the
training, did not know much about it
 Felt happy and good about having the
chance of being part of training on mental
health and depression
 Pleased with the way trainers conducted
the training Enjoyed the subject of the training and found it
useful to help people with stress and tension
 Able to relate to the training subject as they had
experienced symptoms of depression in their
own lives or among people around them
 Pleased to learn about depression and mental
illness as it was a new subject for them
 Learned how to do the training on smartphones
 Digital training app was easy to understand
and navigate
 Digital training app was attractive, interactive,
and well-designed
Challenges and /or
suggestions to
address the
challenges Some participants sought help from family
members (i.e., husband, children, neighbor, etc.)
to address challenges faced while using the
smartphone and understanding the app
Appropriateness
Facilitators Trainers taught the course and were able to
address participants’ questions
 The role plays and group activities were
helpful to learn the topic and helped to
decrease hesitation while performing
role plays
 Participants used training materials to
supplement role plays and group activities
 Liked to learn about the HAP model,
PHQ-9, and counseling skills (e.g., how to
provide mental support and talk to the
person with stress, how to sit during a
session, how to ask questions, etc.) Understandable language
 Learning through video lectures was helpful for
learning the content and more quickly
 Interesting to learn about symptoms of
depression and how to identify them, suicide
risks, PHQ-9, and counseling processes and
counseling skills (e.g., how to build rapport and
how to talk with patients)
 Provision of a list of all modules was useful
 Multiple chances for attempting questions was
helpful to answer the questions correctly and
learn more about particular topics
 Did not use the help tab given on the digital
training app when facing problems, instead
phoned to seek support from the research team
 The support provided by the research team was
helpful in addressing questions and challenges
 Active support from the research team worked
as a motivating factor
 Interactive questions were interesting and kept
participants engaged with the course
 Some participants found the training manual
helpful, others did not feel the need to use it
Challenges and /or
suggestions to
address challenges Some participants did not use training
manual during training
 The training manual should contain details
of all sessions of HAP modules explaining
practical guidelines to carry out HAP
activities and sessions instead of theoretical
HAP details
 Training was too packed and heavy, felt like
a lot of content taught in six days
 Training days can be increased but that will
not be feasible, hence the alternative is to
organize refresher training after every 3 or
6 months Learning PHQ-9 and interpretation of the
PHQ-9 score and activity chart was challenging
to understand for some participants during the
ﬁrst time viewing the course content; but
participants were able to understand the
content after reviewing the content again
 Did not check the notiﬁcations and messages
sent on the digital training app
 Found it di cult to comprehend messages on
the phone that were in the English language
 At the time of orientation to the training
program, the purpose and use of the help option
on the digital training app should be explained
 Calling hours from 10 am to 5 pm to seek
support should be extended as health workers
remain busy with their work schedules during
these hours
 Some of the participants suggested to add
subtitles to the videosInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 14 of 22
Table 5. Cont .
Focus Group
Discussion
ThemesF2F ( n=8) DGT ( n=9) and DGT +(n=11)
Adoption
Facilitators HAP training will be useful to identify the
people with stress or tension (i.e., local term
for depression) in the community and help
them through counseling
 Training will be useful for health workers to
also address their own mental health issues This training can be helpful in providing
counseling to people and especially to pregnant
women with stress and tension
Challenges and /or
suggestions to
address challenges Wanted the course on their mobile device after
completing the training so that they can relearn
the training if they forget anything
Feasibility
Facilitators Convenient and ﬂexible to learn the training in
the time allotted
 Can learn and re-learn the content if needed
Challenges and /or
suggestions to
address challenges Some words in the training were di cult
to understand Poor internet connectivity created disturbance
in learning, and irritation and sometimes
frustration lowered motivation to learn
 Make the entire course o ine to address the
issue of poor internet connectivity
 Poor mobile network in some of the villages
 Use a di erent mobile service provider to
address connectivity issues
 Diculty in understanding how to submit the
answers online
 Include digital orientation training as part of the
course to address the technical challenges
 Deleted the digital training app by mistake
 Due to the challenge of poor internet
connectivity, unable to access all content from
the modules as all videos did not play
F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training; HAP: Healthy Activity Program; PHQ-9: 9-item Patient
Health Questionnaire.
3.2. Preliminary E ectiveness Outcome
Using a paired t-test to explore whether there was a statistically signiﬁcant mean di erence between
the competency scores obtained pre- and post-training for all participants (all three training programs
combined), we found that participants ( N=36) overall scored better on the post-training assessment
(Mean =35.43; SD =11.39) compared to the pre-training (baseline) assessment (Mean =25.82; SD =7.42),
with a maximum attainable score of 100. This represents a signiﬁcant increase of 9.61 points (95% CI:
5.17 to 14.04), t(35)=4.401, p<0.0005, suggesting that competency scores increased after completing
the training program regardless of training format (F2F or digital). For the F2F training, the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test showed a signiﬁcant change in participants’ competency scores ( Z=2.934 ,p=0.0033 ).
For the DGT training participants, the change was not signiﬁcant ( Z=0.863 ,p=0.3882 ), whereas,
for the DGT +training participants, the change was statistically signiﬁcant ( Z=2.271 ,p=0.0231 ),
as illustrated in Figure 2. For F2F, the mean competency score improved by 13.8 (SD =6.6) points,
while for the DGT and DGT +arms it was 2.5 (SD =7.8) points and 12.7 (SD =18.2) points, respectively.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 15 of 22
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 , 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24 
 3.2. Preliminary E ffectiveness Outcome 
Using a paired t-test to explore whether there was a st atistically significant mean difference 
between the competency scores obtained pre- and post -training for all participants (all three training 
programs combined), we found that participants ( N = 36) overall scored better on the post-training 
assessment (Mean  = 35.43; SD  = 11.39) compared to the pre-training (baseline) assessment (Mean  = 
25.82; SD  = 7.42), with a maximum attainable score of 100. This represents a significant increase of 
9.61 points (95% CI: 5.17 to 14.04), t (35) = 4.401, p < 0.0005, suggesting that competency scores 
increased after completing the trai ning program regardless of training format (F2F or digital). For 
the F2F training, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed a significant change in participants’ 
competency scores ( Z = 2.934, p = 0.0033). For the DGT training participants, the change was not 
significant ( Z = 0.863, p = 0.3882), whereas, for the DGT+ training participants, the change was 
statistically significant ( Z = 2.271, p = 0.0231), as illustrated in Figure 2. For F2F, the mean 
competency score improved by 13.8 (SD  = 6.6) points, while for the DGT and DGT+ arms it was 2.5 
(SD = 7.8) points and 12.7 (SD  = 18.2) points, respectively. 
 
Figure 2. Change in competency assessment scores within each training program. Note:  this Figure 
includes scores from the n = 11 in F2F, n = 12 in DGT, and n = 13 DGT+ participants who completed 
the post-training (endline) competency measure; thou gh, some of these participants did not complete 
the training programs. F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training. 
Next, we explored changes in scores on the co mpetency measure between training groups. We 
conducted a Welch’s ANOVA test, which showed that there was a statistically significant difference in change in the competency score obtained before and after the training between the three groups, F 
(2,21) = 7.0358, p = 0.00455. Following up with a Games–Howell post-hoc test, we found that there 
was a statistically significant difference in the scor es on the competency assessment obtained pre- 
and post-training between the F2F and DGT arm with p < 0.01, but not between the F2F and DGT+ 
arms. 
4. Discussion 
This pilot study evaluated the feasibility and acceptability of conventional F2F training 
compared with digital training programs to build the capacity of non-spec ialist health workers for 2826.54
23.3141.75
2936.02
01020304050
F2F DGT DGT+Mean Score
Training ArmsBaseline
Endlinep=0.003
p=0.388p=0.023
Figure 2. Change in competency assessment scores within each training program. Note: this Figure
includes scores from the n=11 in F2F, n=12 in DGT, and n=13 DGT +participants who completed
the post-training (endline) competency measure; though, some of these participants did not complete
the training programs. F2F: Face-to-Face; DGT: Digital Training.
Next, we explored changes in scores on the competency measure between training groups.
We conducted a Welch’s ANOVA test, which showed that there was a statistically signiﬁcant di erence
in change in the competency score obtained before and after the training between the three groups,
F(2,21) =7.0358 ,p=0.00455. Following up with a Games–Howell post-hoc test, we found that there
was a statistically signiﬁcant di erence in the scores on the competency assessment obtained pre- and
post-training between the F2F and DGT arm with p<0.01, but not between the F2F and DGT +arms.
4. Discussion
This pilot study evaluated the feasibility and acceptability of conventional F2F training compared
with digital training programs to build the capacity of non-specialist health workers for delivering
HAP , a brief evidence-based psychological treatment for depression. The primary goals of this study
were to test the study procedures and, importantly, to inform modiﬁcations and reﬁnements to
the training programs in preparation for a large-scale fully powered e ectiveness trial. While we
previously demonstrated the interest in using digital technology for accessing training programs
among non-specialist health workers, the current study substantially expanded on our prior work
by testing these programs in the ﬁeld, allowing the opportunity to gain insights about the use of the
training programs in real world settings.
This study highlighted the need for several signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the digital training program.
These included: the need to modify the timing and structure of the F2F training to accommodate
participants’ long commutes from distant villages, as well as to account for their family responsibilities
such as childcare; the need to ensure that the digital program content could be accessed entirely
oine given the low internet connectivity in rural areas in the Sehore district; the need for a more
comprehensive orientation session for using the smartphone app to access the training program and
navigating the Learning Management System, including use of more pictures and screenshots of ‘how
to’ examples to account for low digital literacy among participants (this was also reﬂected by the large
number of technical assistance calls received during this pilot study); and modiﬁcations to the provision
of technical support, to allow early identiﬁcation of participants who may be struggling to complete the
digital training and enable a more timely response to technical challenges that could arise. The challenge
of poor internet connectivity was similarly reported in a prior trial from Pakistan, where e orts toInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 16 of 22
address this concern also involved ensuring access to the training content in an o ine format [ 30].
This prior study reported that the online training approach required a stable internet connection that
may not be available in many remote, rural, resource-poor settings; hence, to increase the feasibility
of the online training program, the researchers used an o ine tablet-based application to deliver the
training to frontline health workers [ 30]. Following the focus group discussions, we made substantial
modiﬁcations to the remote support component of the DGT +arm, given that participants expressed
high interest in having a member of our research team contact them to provide encouragement and
motivation on a regular basis.
Our study aligns with an emphasis in the digital mental health research literature that it is necessary
to consider the perspectives of users in order to support adoption, engagement, and sustained use
of digital interventions [ 65–67]. Despite the large number of technical challenges that participants
mentioned throughout this pilot study, we were reassured by participants’ continued interest in
learning about the mental health treatment related content. This was consistent between participants
in the digital training programs and F2F training, suggesting recognition among non-specialist health
workers of the importance of depression care in their communities. This is an essential ﬁrst step
towards successfully scaling up mental health services in primary care settings in the Sehore district,
as well as across the state and nation.
Another important ﬁnding in this study was about which cadre of non-specialist health workers
would be most suitable for completing the training program based on their availability. We learned
that the MPWs had too many other competing demands, and were frequently called away by their
superiors for attending to urgent duties, which is reﬂected in their low completion rates across the
three training programs. However, for non-specialist health workers who are frequently required to
travel for other work related activities, use of a digital training program may o er the opportunity for
these individuals to gain the necessary skills to deliver mental health services while accommodating
their already busy workload. In addition, digital training holds the potential to train all types of health
workers on depression care, as the program can be accessed on a smartphone, which could potentially
expand access to mental health services at the community level, thereby advancing e orts to achieve
the Mental Health Care Policy goal of providing universal mental health care services for all [13].
While this was a pilot study primarily focused on assessing the feasibility and acceptability of the
dierent training programs, we found that scores on the competency assessment improved for the
F2F and DGT +participants. This is a promising ﬁnding, suggesting that digital training with added
support may be equally e ective compared to the regular classroom or in-person training in terms
of gaining knowledge and skills. Also, digital training is potentially more convenient, feasible, and
scalable for building the capacity of non-specialist health workers when compared to conventional
in-person training, which is supported by similar studies and recent reviews from other low-income
and middle-income countries [ 30,68,69]. Additionally, the ﬁndings also indicate that the training
content is appropriate for gaining the knowledge and skills related to HAP delivery, as reﬂected
by improved scores on the competency measure. However, the DGT participants did not show
signiﬁcant improvements, suggesting that the use of digital technology alone may not be su cient for
contributing to knowledge acquisition. Importantly, the addition of support initiated by our research
team appeared to greatly improve program completion for DGT +participants (79%) compared to
DGT participants (57%). This is consistent with prior studies of online education programs that have
demonstrated that the use of digital training is most e ective when supplemented with access to remote
or in-person support [ 30,36]. For example, the recent study of the Technology-Assisted Cascaded
Training and Supervision system for Lady Health Workers, conducted in rural areas in Pakistan, found
that use of digital technology in combination with in-person support and training contributed to
comparable improvements in competence as conventional face-to-face training [ 30]. Additionally,
a study in Zambia using technology to train community health workers highlighted a similar ﬁnding
that in-person support is required to address technical challenges related to poor network coverage,
mobile hardware, and software [ 70]. If these challenges are not addressed, it can negatively impactInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 17 of 22
the delivery process and training outcomes [ 70]. Further, a recent review of mobile technologies for
education and the training of community health workers in low-income and middle-income countries
indicated the value of digital training methods for augmenting periodic in-person training activities,
while highlighting that digital training programs could be embedded within existing health care
services to allow opportunities for continuing education among community health workers [69].
Several limitations with this study warrant consideration. Firstly, this was a pilot study looking
at acceptability and feasibility of the training program, and therefore the sample size was small and
not adequately powered to detect di erences in competency outcomes between groups. Additionally,
participants’ satisfaction and acceptability ratings were generally very positive, suggesting a potential
desirability bias. On the other hand, appropriateness was ranked lower, suggesting the need for
improvements to the training programs to promote engagement and sustained interest, which was
further reﬂected during the focus group discussions. The self-report measure used to assess competency
outcomes was translated into Hindi and adapted to the local context, though the psychometric properties
of this measure have not yet been established for use in rural India. It will be important that further
eorts seek to validate this self-report competency measure to support its widespread use in diverse
contexts in India. While more scalable and e cient to administer, the use of a self-report measure for
competency presents other disadvantages compared to conventional competency assessment methods
such as role plays or direct observation because it may not capture the application of skills during direct
interactions between the health worker and patient. Furthermore, we made conscious e orts to limit
potential bias during the quantitative and qualitative data collection. For instance, the quantitative
surveys about satisfaction and acceptability with the training programs may have been subject to
social desirability bias, where participants may have reported highly positive responses. To minimize
this potential risk, members of our research team overseeing data collection were not involved in
the intervention development, and they also reassured participants that there are no right or wrong
answers to the questions about program satisfaction because honest feedback is most important for
ﬁnding ways to improve the training program and content for the future. To minimize a similar
risk of social desirability bias in the qualitative data collection, we ensured that the facilitators of
the focus group discussions and note taking were also not members of our team involved in the
training program development, as they may have inﬂuenced participants’ responses. Members of our
research team who were not involved in the development of the training program conducted the focus
group discussions and collected ﬁeld notes. Given that our study was primarily aimed at informing
a subsequent large-scale trial, we did not conduct an in-depth thematic analysis of our qualitative
ﬁndings. Therefore, in future research developing digital applications, we can build on our approach
presented here to strengthen the qualitative methods for analysis and interpretation of participants’
feedback and recommendations about program design.
We made an e ort to recruit only participants who had not previously participated in our
formative research as a method to minimize prior exposure. However, there is still a possible risk of
contamination [ 71], which we did not assess, though we believe that this risk was low. Furthermore,
the non-specialist health workers were recruited from real world settings; therefore, it is not possible
to fully minimize contamination in such settings, as health workers may look up information about
the training materials on the Internet or may talk to each other about the program content in routine
encounters in the workplace. Participants were recruited from three community health centers in a
single district in Madhya Pradesh, indicating that these ﬁndings may not generalize to other settings in
India in terms of context and culture, or other settings globally. However, many of the ﬁndings reported
here relate to the use of digital training in a low-resource setting and overcoming challenges such as
low digital literacy and poor bandwidth likely apply to many other settings. Our ﬁnding that some
cadres of health workers, such as the MPWs, were not able to complete the training due to their prior
engagement with work commitments highlights potential challenges for scaling up this type of training
program due to competing priorities. Therefore, our ﬁndings may only generalize to health workers
who have the time available and who are interested and willing to learn about treatment for depression.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 18 of 22
To achieve the goal of universal access to mental health services, it will be necessary to consider what
cadres of health workers are available and ideally positioned to successfully complete the training
program and provide care for depression and other mental disorders as part of their routine service
delivery. Furthermore, we restricted our sample to non-specialist health workers with minimum 8th
standard education to ensure that they were literate and able to follow the written training materials,
to access and navigate the training program on the smartphone app, and to answer the questions on
the competency assessment measure. This type of training would likely not be suitable for health
workers who may be illiterate, or who may not be able to operate a smartphone. Even though we
found that roughly half of the sample had ever used a smartphone, all participants randomized to
either of the digital training programs were able to learn to use the smartphone and access the training
program content. This further attests to the interest among non-specialist health workers to use digital
technology to support their work, which has been consistently reported in prior studies [68,69].
5. Conclusions
The ﬁndings and observations from this pilot study o er insights that can inform modiﬁcations
and improvements to the face-to-face and digital training programs for non-specialist health workers
in preparation for a larger fully powered e ectiveness trial. A potentially important ﬁnding from
this pilot study was the apparent motivation for enrollment and starting the training on depression
care among non-specialist health workers ( n=36 out of n=42) and the motivation to complete this
training ( n=27 out of n=36), and speciﬁcally among ASHAs and ASHA Facilitators. Based on our
ﬁndings, there seems to be a demand for training in depression care that will be further explored in the
forthcoming trial. With digital technologies becoming an increasingly important tool in health systems
in many low-resource settings in India, as reﬂected by e orts to ﬁnance the adoption of smartphones
among frontline health workers to support care delivery [ 29], future research can expand on the
ﬁndings reported here to determine how technology can support the scale up of mental health care.
Importantly, it will be necessary to determine how to e ectively leverage digital technology to enable
supervision and quality assurance for the sustained delivery of high quality psychological treatment
for depression, as this will be critical to support task-sharing mental health services in low-resource
settings towards addressing the care gap [72].
Author Contributions: Prepared the study outline and manuscript proposal, S.S.M. and J.A.N.; wrote the ﬁrst
draft of the manuscript, S.S.M., D.T., and J.A.N.; data collection, S.S.M. and U.J.; data analysis, S.S.M., A.A., R.S.
and A.K.; interpretation of the study ﬁndings, S.S.M., A.A., A.K., R.S. and J.A.N.; development and ﬁeld-testing of
the digital training program, A.K., R.S., and D.T.; oversaw the project and supervision, A.B., D.T., V .P . and J.A.N.;
reviewed drafts of the manuscript and provided critical and intellectual inputs, A.K., U.J., J.L.R., A.S., A.B. and V .P .
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), USA
(grant no. U19MH113211). The funder had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Acknowledgments: We would like to acknowledge Dinesh Chandke, Kamlesh Sharma, and Narendra Verma,
for their contribution to participant recruitment and coordination of endpoint assessments. In addition,
we acknowledge Deepali Vishwakarma and Pooja Dhurve, for providing technical support and ensuring
eective delivery of the training programs to participants. We would also like to acknowledge the contributions of
Medha Upadhye, Miriam Sequeira, and Urvita Bhatia for supporting the development of the training program
content. We wish to acknowledge our advisors, collaborators, researchers, and clinicians who have supported our
eorts with the ESSENCE project, including Zafra Cooper, Sona Dimidjian, Christopher Fairburn, Steven Hollon,
Chunling Lu, Lauren Mitchell, Abhijit Nadkarni, Rohit Ramaswamy, Daisy Singla, and Donna Spiegelman.
Additionally, we acknowledge our study participants; the non-specialist health workers for their participation,
time, and contribution to this study; and our collaborators from National Health Mission, Madhya Pradesh State
and National Health Systems Resource Center, Delhi, India for their support.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no competing interests.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 19 of 22
References
1. Sagar, R.; Dandona, R.; Gururaj, G.; Dhaliwal, R.; Singh, A.; Ferrari, A.; Dua, T.; Ganguli, A.; Varghese, M.;
Chakma, J.K. The burden of mental disorders across the states of India: The Global Burden of Disease Study
1990–2017. Lancet Psychiatry 2020 ,7, 148–161. [CrossRef]
2. Arvind, B.A.; Gururaj, G.; Loganathan, S.; Amudhan, S.; Varghese, M.; Benegal, V .; Rao, G.N.; Kokane, A.M.;
Chavan, B.; Dalal, P . Prevalence and socioeconomic impact of depressive disorders in India: Multisite
population-based cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2019 ,9, e027250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Pathare, S.; Brazinova, A.; Levav, I. Care gap: A comprehensive measure to quantify unmet needs in mental
health. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci. 2018 ,27, 463–467. [CrossRef]
4. Patel, V .; Xiao, S.; Chen, H.; Hanna, F.; Jotheeswaran, A.; Luo, D.; Parikh, R.; Sharma, E.; Usmani, S.; Yu, Y.
The magnitude of and health system responses to the mental health treatment gap in adults in India and
China. Lancet 2016 ,388, 3074–3084. [CrossRef]
5. Kokane, A.; Pakhare, A.; Gururaj, G.; Varghese, M.; Benegal, V .; Rao, G.N.; Arvind, B.; Shukla, M.; Mitra, A.;
Yadav, K. Mental Health Issues in Madhya Pradesh: Insights from National Mental Health Survey of India
2016. In Healthcare ; Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute: Basel, Switzerland, 2019.
6. World Health Organization. mhGAP Intervention Guide Mental Health Gap Action Programme Version 2.0 for
Mental, Neurological and Substance use Disorders in Non-Specialized Health Settings ; World Health Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 1–173.
7. Fairburn, C.G.; Patel, V . The global dissemination of psychological treatments: A road map for research and
practice. Am. J. Psychiatry 2014 ,171, 495–498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Kazdin, A.E. Addressing the treatment gap: A key challenge for extending evidence-based psychosocial
interventions. Behav. Res. Ther. 2017 ,88, 7–18. [CrossRef]
9. Raviola, G.; Naslund, J.A.; Smith, S.L.; Patel, V . Innovative Models in Mental Health Delivery Systems: Task
Sharing Care with Non-specialist Providers to Close the Mental Health Treatment Gap. Curr. Psychiatry Rep.
2019 ,21, 44. [CrossRef]
10. Singla, D.R.; A Kohrt, B.; Murray, L.K.; Anand, A.; Chorpita, B.F.; Patel, V . Psychological Treatments for
the World: Lessons from Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 2017 ,13, 149–181.
[CrossRef]
11. Hoeft, T.J.; Fortney, J.C.; Patel, V .; Unützer, J. Task-Sharing Approaches to Improve Mental Health Care in
Rural and Other Low-Resource Settings: A Systematic Review. J. Rural. Heal. 2016 ,34, 48–62. [CrossRef]
12. Barbui, C.; Purgato, M.; Abdulmalik, J.; Acarturk, C.; Eaton, J.; Gastaldon, C.; Gureje, O.; Hanlon, C.;
Jordans, M.; Lund, C.; et al. E cacy of psychosocial interventions for mental health outcomes in low-income
and middle-income countries: An umbrella review. Lancet Psychiatry 2020 ,7, 162–172. [CrossRef]
13. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. New Pathways New Hope National Mental Health Policy of India ; Ministry
of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India: New Delhi, India, 2014.
14. Ministry of Law and Justice. The Mental Health Care Act 2017 ; Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of
India: New Delhi, India, 2017.
15. Directorate General of Health Services. National Mental Health Programme ; Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India: New Delhi, India, 2017.
16. Ahuja, S.; Shidhaye, R.; Khan, A.; Roberts, T.; Jordans, M.; Thornicroft, G.; Petersen, I. Understanding mental
health system governance in India: Perspectives of key stakeholders. Preprints 2020 . [CrossRef]
17. Barnett, M.L.; Lau, A.S.; Miranda, J. Lay health worker involvement in evidence-based treatment delivery:
A conceptual model to address disparities in care. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 2018 ,14, 185–208. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
18. Barnett, M.L.; Gonzalez, A.; Miranda, J.; Chavira, D.A.; Lau, A.S. Mobilizing Community Health Workers to
Address Mental Health Disparities for Underserved Populations: A Systematic Review. Adm. Policy Ment.
Health 2018 ,45, 195–211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Padmanathan, P .; De Silva, M.J. The acceptability and feasibility of task-sharing for mental healthcare in low
and middle income countries: A systematic review. Soc. Sci. Med. 2013 ,97, 82–86. [CrossRef]
20. National Health Mission. Update on ASHA Programme ; Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government
of India: New Delhi, India, 2017.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 20 of 22
21. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. National Rural Health Mission ; Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India: New Delhi, India, 2011.
22. Ved, R.; Scott, K.; Gupta, G.; Ummer, O.; Singh, S.; Srivastava, A.; George, A. How are gender inequalities
facing India’s one million ASHAs being addressed? Policy origins and adaptations for the world’s largest
all-female community health worker programme. Hum. Resour. Health 2019 ,17, 3. [CrossRef]
23. National Rural Health Mission. ASHA: Which way forward? Evaluation of ASHA Programme ; National Rural
Health Mission, National Health Systems Resource Center, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India: New Delhi, India, 2011.
24. Fairburn, C.G.; Cooper, Z. Therapist competence, therapy quality, and therapist training. Behav. Res. Ther.
2011 ,49, 373–378. [CrossRef]
25. Naslund, J.A.; Shidhaye, R.; Patel, V . Digital Technology for Building Capacity of Nonspecialist Health
Workers for Task Sharing and Scaling Up Mental Health Care Globally. Harv. Rev. Psychiatry 2019 ,27,
181–192. [CrossRef]
26. Naslund, J.A.; Aschbrenner, K.A.; Araya, R.; Marsch, L.A.; Unützer, J.; Patel, V .; Bartels, S.J. Digital technology
for treating and preventing mental disorders in low-income and middle-income countries: A narrative
review of the literature. Lancet Psychiatry 2017 ,4, 486–500. [CrossRef]
27. Keelery, S. Mobile Phone Internet Users in India 2015–2023. Available online: https: //www.statista.com /
statistics /558610 /number-of-mobile-internet-user-in-india /(accessed on 7 August 2020).
28. Modi, D.; Dholakia, N.; Gopalan, R.; Venkatraman, S.; Dave, K.; Shah, S.; Desai, G.; Qazi, S.A.; Sinha, A.;
Pandey, R.M. mHealth intervention “ImTeCHO” to improve delivery of maternal, neonatal, and child
care services—A cluster-randomized trial in tribal areas of Gujarat, India. PloS Med. 2019 ,16, e1002939.
[CrossRef]
29. Saha, S.; Kotwani, P .; Pandya, A.; Patel, C.; Shah, K.; Saxena, D.; Puwar, T.; Desai, S.; Patel, D.M.;
Sethuraman, A. Addressing comprehensive primary healthcare in Gujarat through mHealth intervention:
Early implementation experience with TeCHO +programme. J. Fam. Med. Prim. Care 2020 ,9, 340. [CrossRef]
30. Rahman, A.; Akhtar, P .; Hamdani, S.U.; Atif, N.; Nazir, H.; Uddin, I.; Nisar, A.; Huma, Z.; Maselko, J.;
Sikander, S. Using technology to scale-up training and supervision of community health workers in the
psychosocial management of perinatal depression: A non-inferiority, randomized controlled trial. Glob. Ment.
Health 2019 ,6, e8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Maulik, P .K.; Kallakuri, S.; Devarapalli, S.; Vadlamani, V .K.; Jha, V .; Patel, A. Increasing use of mental health
services in remote areas using mobile technology: A pre–post evaluation of the SMART Mental Health
project in rural India. J. Glob. Health 2017 ,7, 010408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Shields-Zeeman, L.; Pathare, S.; Walters, B.H.; Kapadia-Kundu, N.; Joag, K. Promoting wellbeing and
improving access to mental health care through community champions in rural India: The Atmiyata
intervention approach. Int. J. Ment. Health Syst. 2017 ,11, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Gonsalves, P .P .; Hodgson, E.S.; Kumar, A.; Aurora, T.; Chandak, Y.; Sharma, R.; Michelson, D.; Patel, V . Design
and development of the ‘POD Adventures’ smartphone game: A blended problem-solving intervention for
adolescent mental health in India. Front. Public Health 2019 ,7, 238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Muke, S.; Shrivastava, R.; Mitchell, L.; Khan, A.; Murhar, V .; Tugnawat, D.; Shidhaye, R.; Patel, V .;
Naslund, J.A. Acceptability and feasibility of digital technology for training community health workers to
deliver evidence-based psychosocial treatment for depression in rural India. Asian J. Psychiatry 2019 ,45,
99–106. [CrossRef]
35. Patel, V .; Weobong, B.; Weiss, H.A.; Anand, A.; Bhat, B.; Katti, B.; Dimidjian, S.; Araya, R.; Hollon, S.D.;
King, M. The Healthy Activity Program (HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment
for severe depression, in primary care in India: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017 ,389, 176–185.
[CrossRef]
36. Homitz, D.J.; Berge, Z.L. Using e-mentoring to sustain distance training and education. Learn. Organ. 2008 ,
15, 326–335. [CrossRef]
37. Friedman, L.W.; Friedman, H. Using social media technologies to enhance online learning. J. Educ. Online
2013 ,10, 1–22. [CrossRef]
38. Eldridge, S.M.; Chan, C.L.; Campbell, M.J.; Bond, C.M.; Hopewell, S.; Thabane, L.; Lancaster, G.A. CONSORT
2010 statement: Extension to randomised pilot and feasibility trials. BMJ 2016 ,355, i5239. [CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 21 of 22
39. Directorate of Census Operations Madhya Pradesh. Census of India 2011: Provisional Population Totals Madhya
Pradesh ; Ministry of Home A airs, Government of India: New Delhi, India, 2011.
40. Suryanarayana, M.; Agrawal, A.; Seeta Prabhu, K. Inequality-Adjusted Human Development Index for India’s States ;
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP): New Delhi, India, 2011.
41. Menon, P .; Deolalikar, A.; Bhaskar, A. India State Hunger Index: Comparisons of Hunger Across States ;
International Food Policy Research Institute: Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
42. Billingham, S.A.; Whitehead, A.L.; Julious, S.A. An audit of sample sizes for pilot and feasibility trials being
undertaken in the United Kingdom registered in the United Kingdom Clinical Research Network database.
BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 2013 ,13, 104. [CrossRef]
43. National Health Mission. Nation Health Mission (M.P.) ; National Health Mission: New Delhi, India, 2018.
44. Saprii, L.; Richards, E.; Kokho, P .; Theobald, S. Community health workers in rural India: Analysing the
opportunities and challenges Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) face in realising their multiple
roles. Hum. Resour. Health 2015 ,13, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Scott, K.; George, A.S.; Ved, R.R. Taking stock of 10 years of published research on the ASHA programme:
Examining India’s national community health worker programme from a health systems perspective.
Health Res. Policy Syst. 2019 ,17, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Satpathy, S. Indian public health standards (IPHS) for community health centres. Indian J. Public Health 2005 ,
49, 123–126. [PubMed]
47. Directorate General of Health Services. Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS) For Community Health Centres
(Revised 2010) ; Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of
India: New Delhi, India, 2010.
48. Harris, P .A.; Taylor, R.; Minor, B.L.; Elliott, V .; Fernandez, M.; O’Neal, L.; McLeod, L.; Delacqua, G.;
Delacqua, F.; Kirby, J. The REDCap consortium: Building an international community of software platform
partners. J. Biomed. Inform. 2019 ,95, 103208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Chowdhary, N.; Anand, A.; Dimidjian, S.; Shinde, S.; Weobong, B.; Balaji, M.; Hollon, S.D.; Rahman, A.;
Wilson, G.T.; Verdeli, H. The Healthy Activity Program lay counsellor delivered treatment for severe
depression in India: Systematic development and randomised evaluation. Br. J. Psychiatry 2016 ,208, 381–388.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Weobong, B.; Weiss, H.A.; McDaid, D.; Singla, D.R.; Hollon, S.D.; Nadkarni, A.; Park, A.-L.; Bhat, B.;
Katti, B.; Anand, A. Sustained e ectiveness and cost-e ectiveness of the Healthy Activity Programme, a brief
psychological treatment for depression delivered by lay counsellors in primary care: 12-month follow-up of
a randomised controlled trial. PLoS Med. 2017 ,14, e1002385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Walker, I.F.; Khanal, S.; Hicks, J.P .; Lamichhane, B.; Thapa, A.; Elsey, H.; Baral, S.C.; Newell, J.N.
Implementation of a psychosocial support package for people receiving treatment for multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis in Nepal: A feasibility and acceptability study. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13, e0201163. [CrossRef]
52. Jordans, M.J.; Luitel, N.P .; Garman, E.; Kohrt, B.A.; Rathod, S.D.; Shrestha, P .; Komproe, I.H.; Lund, C.;
Patel, V . E ectiveness of psychological treatments for depression and alcohol use disorder delivered by
community-based counsellors: Two pragmatic randomised controlled trials within primary healthcare in
Nepal. Br. J. Psychiatry 2019 ,215, 485–493. [CrossRef]
53. Shidhaye, R.; Baron, E.; Murhar, V .; Rathod, S.; Khan, A.; Singh, A.; Shrivastava, S.; Muke, S.; Shrivastava, R.;
Lund, C. Community, facility and individual level impact of integrating mental health screening and
treatment into the primary healthcare system in Sehore district, Madhya Pradesh, India. BMJ Glob. Health
2019 ,4, e001344. [CrossRef]
54. Khan, A.; Shrivastava, R.; Tugnawat, D.; Singh, A.; Dimidjian, S.; Patel, V .; Bhan, A.; Naslund, J.A. Design and
Development of a Digital Program for Training Non-specialist Health Workers to Deliver an Evidence-Based
Psychological Treatment for Depression in Primary Care in India. J. Technol. Behav. Sci. 2020 . [CrossRef]
55. Jones, B.D. User Guide for Assessing the Components of the MUSIC®Model of Motivation. Available online:
https: //www.themusicmodel.com /(accessed on 15 November 2018).
56. Jones, B.D. Motivating students to engage in learning: The MUSIC model of academic motivation.
International. J. Teach. Learn. High. Educ. 2009 ,21, 272–285.
57. Jones, B.D. An examination of motivation model components in face-to-face and online instruction. Electron.
J. Res. Educ. Psychol. 2010 ,8, 915–944. [CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 6368 22 of 22
58. Jones, B.D. Motivating Students by Design: Practical Strategies for Professors , 2nd ed.; CreateSpace: Charleston,
SC, USA, 2018.
59. Cooper, Z.; Doll, H.; Bailey-Straebler, S.; Bohn, K.; de Vries, D.; Murphy, R.; O’Connor, M.E.; Fairburn, C.G.
Assessing therapist competence: Development of a performance-based measure and its comparison with a
web-based measure. JMIR Ment. Health 2017 ,4, e51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Restivo, J.L.; Mitchell, L.; Joshi, U.; Anand, A.; Gugiu, P .C.; Hollon, S.D.; Singla, D.R.; Patel, V .; Naslund, J.A.;
Cooper, Z. Assessing health worker competence to deliver a brief psychological treatment for depression:
Development and validation of a scalable measure. J. Behav. Cogn. Ther. 2020 , in press.
61. Popham, W.J. Teaching to the Test? Educ. Leadersh. 2001 ,58, 16–21.
62. Yardley, L.; Morrison, L.; Bradbury, K.; Muller, I. The person-based approach to intervention development:
Application to digital health-related behavior change interventions. J. Med. Internet Res. 2015 ,17, e30.
[CrossRef]
63. Gale, N.K.; Heath, G.; Cameron, E.; Rashid, S.; Redwood, S. Using the framework method for the analysis of
qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health research. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 2013 ,13, 117. [CrossRef]
64. Rey, D.; Neuhäuser, M. Wilcoxon-Signed-Rank Test. In International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science ;
Gibbons, J.D., Chakraborti, S., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2011; pp. 1658–1659.
65. Naslund, J.A.; Gonsalves, P .P .; Gruebner, O.; Pendse, S.R.; Smith, S.L.; Sharma, A.; Raviola, G. Digital
Innovations for Global Mental Health: Opportunities for Data Science, Task Sharing, and Early Intervention.
Curr. Treat. Options Psychiatry 2019 ,6, 337–351. [CrossRef]
66. Mohr, D.C.; Lyon, A.R.; Lattie, E.G.; Reddy, M.; Schueller, S.M. Accelerating digital mental health research
from early design and creation to successful implementation and sustainment. J. Med. Internet Res. 2017 ,
19, e153. [CrossRef]
67. Merchant, R.; Torous, J.; Rodriguez-Villa, E.; Naslund, J.A. Digital technology for management of severe
mental disorders in low-income and middle-income countries. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 2020 ,33, 501–507.
[CrossRef]
68. Winters, N.; Langer, L.; Nduku, P .; Robson, J.; O’Donovan, J.; Maulik, P .; Paton, C.; Geniets, A.; Peiris, D.;
Nagraj, S. Using mobile technologies to support the training of community health workers in low-income and
middle-income countries: Mapping the evidence. BMJ Glob. Health 2019 ,4, e001421. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Winters, N.; Langer, L.; Geniets, A. Scoping review assessing the evidence used to support the adoption of
mobile health (mHealth) technologies for the education and training of community health workers (CHWs)
in low-income and middle-income countries. BMJ Open 2018 ,8, e019827. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Biemba, G.; Chiluba, B.; Yeboah-Antwi, K.; Silavwe, V .; Lunze, K.; Mwale, R.K.; Russpatrick, S.; Hamer, D.H.
A mobile-based community health management information system for community health workers and
their supervisors in 2 districts of Zambia. Glob. Health Sci. Pract. 2017 ,5, 486–494. [CrossRef]
71. Keogh-Brown, M.; Bachmann, M.; Shepstone, L.; Hewitt, C.; Howe, A.; Ramsay, C.R.; Song, F.; Miles, J.;
Torgerson, D.; Miles, S. Contamination in trials of educational interventions. Health Technol. Assess. 2007 ,
11, ix-107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Kemp, C.G.; Petersen, I.; Bhana, A.; Rao, D. Supervision of Task-Shared Mental Health Care in Low-Resource
Settings: A Commentary on Programmatic Experience. Glob. Health: Sci. Pract. 2019 ,7, 150–159. [CrossRef]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).