 
 e-Agriculture  
Good Practice  
Digital Green’ s social behavior change 
communication model for extension  
Incubated as a Microsoft research project in Bangalore, India, in 
2006, the Digital Green participatory video project was part of 
an effort to test different ways of using technology for social 
development. This project focused  specifically on testing the use 
of participatory video as a means of agricultural extension. The 
approach was proven to be substantially more effective as a 
means of extension than existing conventional agricultural 
extension programmes.  
Digital Green has partnered with over 50 partners in over 20 
projects since 2008. Digital Green has implemented projects in 
nine states in India, and in 15 other countries including, 
Afghanistan, Nigeria, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Ethiopia, Ghana, 
Niger, Bu rkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Guinea, Tanzania, Mozambique, 
Senegal, Malawi and Guinea.  
 Videos scaling the reach of  
extension workers and increasing  
adoption rates of best practices  
 Location:  South -Asia and 
Sub-Saharan Africa  
 ICT used: Video, data 
management framework  
 Area of work: Extension 
services – nutrition and 
agriculture  
 Target group : Rural f arming 
communities  
 Stakeholders:  Smallholder 
farmers, extension workers 
and over 50 partners in 20 
projects  
 Timeframe:  Since 2008  
 Key facts  
© Digital Green / Aniruddh Kaushal  
 
 Digital Green reached over 
1.5 million farmers with 
their videos since 2008  
Conte xt and problem addressed 
by information and 
communication technologies 
(ICT)  
Although smallholder farmers produce much of the 
world’s food, they are too often poor and 
malnourished. Digital Green has been working since 
2008 to improve smallholder farmers’ pro ductivity 
by partnering with governments, private agencies 
and, most importantly, rural communities 
themselves to co -create digital solutions that are of 
the community and for the community.  
Initially incubated as a research project at Microsoft 
Research, Digital Green’s model was developed by a 
group of engineers and economists. Their research 
revealed that the prevalent agricultural extension 
systems in most developing countries could be 
costly, slow, and limited in effectiveness.  
Classical 'training & visit' programs usually involve 
an extension worker traveling from village to 
village, door to door, and speaking with a select 
number of individuals in a village, usually males 
who own larger  farms.  
Farmers may be slow to adopt external extension 
trainers' techniques due to several factors: external 
agents often do not possess location specific 
knowledge, their visits can be infrequent and 
erratic, and their information rarely reaches 
farmers  with the lowest yields, who often are 
women. Alternatives to the 'training & visit' mode, 
such as farmer field schools are believed to have a 
better impact, but at a dramatically higher cost. 
Cost -effective solutions are rare.   
 The development of the IC T 
used: videos and data 
management platform  
Digital Green trains communities and partner staff 
to create short videos capturing scientific and 
locally relevant best practices to be disseminated 
among the local community. These videos are 
filmed by rural co mmunity members and also 
featuring them, edited and shown in community 
screenings in neighboring villages.  
Digital Green builds the capacity of the partner 
organization’s field professionals and community -
level intermediaries to produce and share localized  
videos to improve the efficiency of their existing 
operations and broaden the participation of the 
communities that they work with. Digital Green has 
developed specific capacity building modules  
(http: //www.digitalgreen.org/training/  ) on video 
production, dissemination (screening) and data 
management.  
A robust data management framework, called CoCo   
(http://www.digitalgreen.org/coco/ ) was 
developed to capture near -real time data on the 
screenings and adoptions of the best practices by 
the viewers of the videos. The framework also 
includes strong monitoring and evaluation tools to 
provide evidence based learning and feedback.  Data 
colle ction and analysis is critical to the work of 
Digital Green, and CoCo is the data workhorse. Short 
for Connect Online Connect Offline, CoCo and the 
analytics dashboards allow users to collect and 
visualize crucial insights anytime, anywhere, on any 
device – regardless of network connectivity.  
© Digital Green / Aniruddh Kaushal   
 From what videos are produced to what 
practices farmers apply on their farms, the data 
are tracked in the framework. Built as a robust 
standalone application in the Internet browser, 
CoCo requires no software installation or 
maintenance. With affordable sm artphones and 
tablets becoming increasingly common, CoCo 
was developed to be fully functional on all 
modern browsers compliant with the HTML5 
standard and can be opened on any device.  
The Analytics Dashboards generates near real -
time information for learn ing, monitoring and 
evaluation, even in remote and rural areas with 
limited electricity and Internet connectivity. The 
user -friendly tool allows drilling down from 
country to village level, zooming in on the exact 
information needed  to track performance an d 
drive program improvement.  Rigorous quality 
assurance is part of Digital Green’s data 
philosophy. To ensure that the data is sound and 
trustable enough to inform programmatic 
decisions Digital Green regularly validates the 
quality of the data collected.  The staff regularly 
goes out and validates data: they go to see video 
screenings as they happen, visit the field to check 
on adoptions, and have third -party evaluators 
come in to check data on CoCo.  A village 
resources person 
explains the non -
negotiable 
aspects of a good 
practice at a 
video screening  
Data analysis and evaluation is an integral part of 
the process, therefore Digital Green  share s the 
quantitative and qualitative data gathered with 
researchers, practitioners, policy makers, and 
anyone else involved, creating a community of 
collaborators that improves systems on an ongoing 
basis.  
Digital Green  uses evidence from the grassroots -
level to inform and galvanize this constellation of 
stakeholders on what works -- and what doesn’t -- 
to advance agricultural development globally.  
Digital Green’s bottom -up approach leverages 
existing rural social networ ks such as women’s self -
help groups and farmer groups to create and share 
localized content on  best practices  related to 
farming, livelihood, health and nutrition through 
short videos using low -cost and durable technology.  
Digital Green plugs its model into existing, people -
based extension systems, aiming to amplify their 
effectiveness.  For instance in India, Digital Green 
works closely with the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission (NRLM) as a National Support Organization. 
Digital Green trains the extensio n agents identified 
by the State Rural livelihood Missions in using the 
video -based approach, which magnifies their reach 
and impact.  
CoCo and the Analytics Dashboard are open for anyone to use.  
Check them out here: http://sandbox.dgtest.org/coco/#login  
Login: guestuser - Password: digitalgreen  
Analytics dashboard: http s://solutions.digitalgreen.org/coco/analytics/  
© Digital Green/Aniruddh Kaushal   
 A community video production team of four to six 
individuals in each district creates videos, averaging 
eight to ten minut es in length, which are screened 
for small community groups twice a week using 
battery - operated Pico projectors (small portable 
projectors). The practices promoted through the 
videos are locally relevant and evidence -based, 
produced in the regional langua ge. The short videos 
cast local community members, thus ensuring the 
viewers’ instant connection with the messaging. 
Subject matter experts review the video content 
before it is finalized for screening. A trained village 
resource person mediates a discussi on around the 
video screenings by pausing, rewinding, asking 
questions, and responding to feedback. Regular 
verification visits are scheduled for measuring the 
effects of the screenings on adoption of actual 
practices.  
The entire approach is designed to b e responsive to 
community feedback, channeling data and feedback 
received from community members into the video 
production and dissemination processes and overall 
program performance. Trained extension agents 
record farmers’ attendance at video screenings,  
interests, queries, comments and any changes in 
their behaviors as a result of adopting a new 
practice/technology.  
The farmers share their thoughts on anything they 
choose, from the videos they would like to watch to 
the viewing experience to the challen ges they face in 
their daily lives. This feedback is used to inform 
further iterations of the videos, and also of essential 
background processes such as storyboarding, the 
messaging, or even the way a screening is organized.  
For instance, in a project site  in Amethi district of 
the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, we recognized 
farmers’ reluctance to adopt a new way of treating 
seeds was because they didn’t fully understand what 
the associated video described. On further 
examination, it was found that it was a challenge for 
the farmers to remember the measurement for 
trichoderma, an important seed -treating agent, 
which was communicated in grams per unit volume 
of wheat. When the measurement unit was tweaked 
from grams to approximate teaspoon measurement, 
the f armers were able to understand and retain the 
concept.  Innovation and success factors  
Digital Green offers a community -driven, 
technology -enabled, knowledge -sharing platform 
for rural communities to share and promote 
evidence -based and localized best prac tices. The 
communities are both creators and consumers of 
knowledge products which also capitalizes on the 
thrill of appearing "on video" to increase the reach 
within the communities’ social networks.  
Digital Green has demonstrated that a participatory 
process of engagement combined with simple 
technology solutions can enable small -scale farming 
communities to produce and share information on 
best practices for improved productivity and 
sustainable live lihoods. Initial pilot studies not only 
indicated a higher uptake of practices through the 
video -based approach, but also revealed that the 
Digital Green model was more cost -effective than 
classical systems of agricultural extension.  
Gandhi et al. (2009)  state that the Digital Green 
approach was at least ten times more efficient and 
seven times more likely to encourage farmers to 
adopt new practices compared to conventional 
agricultural extension  systems.  
A trainer records the skills of the VPR’s  in a mobile 
application . © Digital Green / Aniruddh Kaushal   
 Sustainability  
Digital Green’s role of a National Support 
Organization with the Government of India’s 
National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) since 
2012 has enabled several successful partnerships 
with the state bodies in Bihar, Rajasthan, 
Jharkhand, Odisha, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, and Chhattisgarh. They have plugged 
their  video based approach to strengthen their 
extension systems that are delivered primarily 
through women’s self help groups. Digital Green 
works with all lev els of the government in over 
14,000 villages across India  (Dec 2017) , and trained 
over 12 ,000 frontline workers (Dec 2017) to use our 
approach, promoting improved agriculture and 
nutrition practices. Women constitute over 90 per 
cent of the viewers of our videos and they are 
themselves  the adopters of the best practices shared 
through the videos and also act as the carriers of the 
message within their families.  
India’s National Rural Livelihood Mission  has 
committed itself to operationalize Digital Green’s 
approach. This transformation has shifted the way 
NRLM produces and shares knowledge between the 
research agencies, extension agents, and farmers 
that it engages as well as how it collects and 
analyzes evidence for its policies and programs at 
national, state and local levels. We have developed 
similar successful partnerships with key stakeholder 
in Ethiopia and other countries as well where 
existing national extension systems absorb the costs 
and improve their reach and efficacy.  
Digital Green’s video -enabled approach is 
dependent on p eople – in particular, frontline 
workers who screen the videos in their communities.  Replicability and upscaling  
Digital Green works towards addressing the 
information gap for rural communities through 
appropriate technologies. Combining offline 
solutions such as handheld camera and projectors to 
produce and screen videos with mobile app based 
solutions and online da ta management platforms 
that also tackle limited Internet connections and 
intermittent electricity supply.  
Data captured on intuitive paper forms is digitized 
using an innovative data management system, 
Connect Online | Connect Offline (COCO) that 
allows users to seamlessly toggle between offline and 
online modes on the web browser for uninterrupted 
usage in regions with intermittent Internet 
connectivity.  
This data powers a suite of online Analytics 
Dashboard to help monitor and improve 
programmatic acti vities on the ground. The public, 
private and civil organizations they partner with 
deploy the offline and online solutions to increase 
the efficiency of their extension services and help 
improve the lives of rural communities.  
The aggregated data helps in  trend analysis, in 
performance assessment and in measuring the 
outcomes of the intervention . 
Digital Green has an 
average adoption rate of 
over 60% for the 
promoted best practices  
Digital Green staff 
providing training to the 
village resource persons 
on filling paper forms for 
data collection  
  © Digital Green / Aniruddh Kaushal   
 Individual farmer feedback is collected, aggregated 
and visualized, generating trends and to make 
programmatic course corrections based on field -
level observations - underscoring the value of 
employing a bot tom -up approach to designing 
community interventions.   
Digital Green’s suite of mobile solutions currently 
comprises of responsive web tools, mobile 
applications and interactive voice response systems 
(IVRS) and also a video -enabled courseware for 
trainin g the frontline staff and a mobile assessment 
app.   
Applying the model in other 
sectors  
Given the model’s success in agriculture, a 
feasibility study conducted in 2013 -14 showed 
positive outcomes in applying the Digital Green 
approach to promote nutrition  behavior change and 
provided some suggestions for greater impact.  
In 2015 -16, Digital Green led the BIRAC Grand 
Challenge India -supported “Digital Technology 
Enabled and Community -Driven Integrated 
Agriculture and Nutrition Intervention to Promote 
Materna l and Child Nutrition in Odisha” project, 
which aimed to strengthen Digital Green’s 
participatory video approach to improve nutrition 
behaviours in Odisha state (India) by establishing in 
quantitative terms its effectiveness. The project 
showed significant  improvement in knowledge of 
key nutrition behaviors among mothers of young 
children.  
The project was conducted in 30 villages of 
Keonjhar district, Odisha. These villages were 
randomly assigned to either a control group, 
exposed to video production and d issemination 
consistent with Digital Green’s existing approach, or 
an intervention group, which accessed video 
production and dissemination with a special 
emphasis on enhancing content identification, 
content development, and facilitation through a 
partici patory learning and action (PLA) approach. 
Results suggest a significant improvement in the 
knowledge of self -help group members on nutrition 
issues across both intervention and comparison 
arms. This program demonstrated the effectiveness 
of participatory videos and the participatory learning and action (PLA) method to change 
nutrition behaviors and has the potential to be 
adapted and replicated in other nutrition programs. 
Following this Digital Green has deployed its 
approach to improve the health and nut rition 
extension systems in many different regions in India 
and countries of Africa.  
Future Vision  
With a new five -year strategy, efforts are on now to 
map the impact of the work in terms of 
improvement in yield and income. Digital Green is 
taking the enga gement further by adopting the  value 
chain lens and exploring new application of 
technologies to ensure better market linkages and 
credit facilities for farmers.  
 
Farmer’s story  
“Ghanjeevamrit  (bio fertilizer) keeps the soil light and 
helps it retain moisture, which in turn keeps the 
plants greener and healthier. The vegetables also 
taste good. I am really glad that I watched the videos 
on natural farming and have adopted it,”  shares 
Somia Devi  of Nikaspur village, Samastipur District, 
Bihar, India.  
“Earlier, when I had only heard about this new 
method, I was quite unsure. I used to wonder if my 
field would adjust, but now after watching the video 
and adopting this method I am very confident and  
also motivate others to adopt it. It was difficult for me 
to convince myself before I watched the video,”  adds 
Somia Devi who owns a plot of 1 Kattha (1 acre is 22 
kattha) were she grows a variety of vegetables.  
The video Somia Devi refers to, is part of the unique 
model used by Digital Green a not -for-profit 
international development organization that uses 
innovative digital solutions and community 
engagement in the areas of agriculture, livelihood, 
health, sanitation and nutrition, to improve lives of 
rural communities across Asia and Africa.  
 
6 Vinay Kumar  
Digital Green  
vinay@digitalgreen.org About the author 
Vinay  Kumar is the Regional Director for Asia and Global Initiatives 
at Digital Green.  
Vinay  Kumar is a founding member of Digital Green and provides 
leadership to program strategy, organizational development and 
operations. His interests include sustainable agriculture, livelihoods, 
global health and nutrition. He has extensive experience of over 30 
years in public, private and non -profit sectors. Prior to Digital 
Green,  Vinay  was India Operations Director at Program for 
Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH ). He led operations at 
IntraHealth International Inc. for its Asia and Near East 
office.  Vinay  also served as an Advisor to the Department of 
Biotechnology, Govt. of India and Consulting Editor of Indian 
Management, a professional journal of All India Man agement 
Association. He has an MBA from Delhi University, MA in political 
science and M. Phil. in international relations from Jawaharlal Nehru 
University.  
Resources 
Website: www.digitalgreen.org
Gandhi, R., Veeraraghavan, R., Toyama, K. & Ramprasad , V. 2009. Digital Green: participatory video for
agricultural extension. Information technologies for international development. MIT Press. Available at,
http://itidjournal.org/itid/ article/view/322/145
E-AGRICULTURE CALL FOR GOOD AND PROMISING PRACTICES
This document was developed in the framework of t he 2017 e -Agriculture Call for Good and Promising 
Practices on the use of ICTs for Agriculture and Rural Development in collaboration with the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural  
Cooperation (CTA).  
e-Agriculture is always happy to review your good or promising practices! You can submit a proposal, following
the sections in this document to e-agriculture@fao.org
Would you like to stay informed? Register to become a member of the e -Agriculture
Community of Practice: www.e -agriculture.org/user/register
Good and Promising Practices on the use ICT for agri culture in collaboration with 
© Digital Green  
 © FAO, 2018 
I9182EN/1/04.18  