EAMENA training in the use of satellite remote sensing and digital
technologies in heritage management: Libya and Tunisia workshops
2017 –2019
By Matthew S. Hobson
Abstract
This article provides a brief summary of the aims, methods
and results of a programme of training carried out by the
EAMENA project in partnership with the Tunisian InstitutNational du Patrimoine and the Libyan Department of
Antiquities. The focus was on the use of freely available
satellite imagery for archaeological site identification andmonitoring, on compiling and maintaining spatial databases -
including the on-the-ground location of sites with the use of a
GPS - and on the observation of patterns of preservation andthreat within Geographical Information Systems to informheritage management decisions at both regional and national
levels. Three pairs of workshops took place in Tunis in 2017,
2018 and 2019, with interim support being given to partici-pants by a Training Manager and Research Assistant based
at the University of Leicester. The work was part of a larger
scheme offered to heritage professionals across the MiddleEast and North Africa by the EAMENA project thanks to a
grant received from the Cultural Protection Fund. In general
this training has been very well received. Not only has itsuccessfully achieved the propagation of desirable and much
needed skills within partner institutions, it has also raised
awareness of issues affecting the protection of culturalheritage within the broader community.
ﻩﺬﻔﻨﻳﻱﺬﻟﺍﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍﺞﻣﺎﻧﺮﺑﺞﺋﺎﺘﻧﻭﻕﺮﻃﻭﻑﺍﺪﻫﻷﺰﺟﻮﻣﺺﺨﻠﻣﻝﺎﻘﻤﻟﺍﺍﺬﻫﻡﺪﻘﻳ
ﻉﻭﺮﺸﻣ EAMENAﻨﻃﻮﻟﺍﺪﻬﻌﻤﻟﺍﻊﻣﺔﻛﺍﺮﺸﻟﺎﺑ
ﺔﺤﻠﺼﻣﻭﻲﺴﻧﻮﺘﻟﺍﺙﺍﺮﺘﻠﻟﻲ
ﺔﻴﺒﻴﻠﻟﺍﺭﺎﺛﻵﺍ.ﺓﺮﻓﻮﺘﻤﻟﺍﺔﻴﻋﺎﻨﺼﻟﺍﺭﺎﻤﻗﻷﺍﺭﻮﺻﻡﺍﺪﺨﺘﺳﺍﻰﻠﻋﺰﻴﻛﺮﺘﻟﺍﻥﺎﻛﺚﻴﺣ
ﻧﺎﺠﻣﴼﺎﻫﺪﺻﺭﻭﺔﻳﺮﺛﻷﺍﻊﻗﺍﻮﻤﻟﺍﺪﻳﺪﺤﺘﻟ،ﺕﺎﻧﺎﻴﺒﻟﺍﺪﻋﺍﻮﻗﺔﻧﺎﻴﺻﻭﻊﻴﻤﺠﺗﻰﻠﻋﻭ
ﺔﻴﻧﺎﻜﻤﻟﺍ-ﻡﺍﺪﺨﺘﺳﺎﺑﻊﻗﺍﻮﻟﺍﺽﺭﺃﻰﻠﻋﻥﺎﻜﻤﻟﺍﺪﻳﺪﺤﺗﻚﻟﺫﻲﻓﺎﻤﺑ GPS-ﻭ
ﺔﻴﻓﺍﺮﻐﺠﻟﺍﺕﺎﻣﻮﻠﻌﻤﻟﺍﻢﻈﻧﻞﺧﺍﺩﺕﺍﺪﻳﺪﻬﺘﻟﺍﻭﻆﻔﺤﻟﺍﻁﺎﻤﻧﺃﺔﺒﻗﺍﺮﻣﻰﻠﻋﻚﻟﺬﻛ
ﻲﻤﻴﻠﻗﻹﺍﻦﻳﺪﻴﻌﺼﻟﺍﻰﻠﻋﺙﺍﺮﺘﻟﺍﺓﺭﺍﺩﺇﺺﺨﺗﺕﺍﺭﺍﺮﻗﺫﺎﺨﺗﺍﺪﻨﻋﻝﺎﻤﻌﺘﺳﻼﻟ
ﻲﻨﻃﻮﻟﺍﻭ.ﻋُﻡﺍﻮﻋﻷﺍﻲﻓﺲﻧﻮﺗﻲﻓﻞﻤﻌﻟﺍﺵﺭﻭﻦﻣﺝﺍﻭﺯﺃﺔﺛﻼﺛﺕﺪﻘ 2017
ﻭ 2018ﻭ 2019،ﺮﻳﺪﻣﻞﺒﻗﻦﻣﻦﻴﻛﺭﺎﺸﻤﻠﻟﻯﺪﻤﻟﺍﺮﻴﺼﻗﻢﻋﺩﻢﻳﺪﻘﺗﻊﻣ
ﺮﺘﺴﻴﻟﺔﻌﻣﺎﺟﻦﻣﺚﺣﺎﺑﺪﻋﺎﺴﻣﻭﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ.ﺀﺰﺟﻞﻤﻌﻟﺍﺍﺬﻫﻥﺎﻛﺪﻗﻭﴽﻦﻣ
ﻂﺳﻭﻷﺍﻕﺮﺸﻟﺍﺔﻘﻄﻨﻣﻲﻓﺙﺍﺮﺘﻟﺍﻝﺎﺠﻣﻲﻓﻦﻴﻴﻨﻬﻤﻠﻟﻪﻤﻳﺪﻘﺗﻢﺗﺮﺒﻛﺃﻂﻄﺨﻣ
ﻉﻭﺮﺸﻣﻝﻼﺧﻦﻣﺎﻴﻘﻳﺮﻓﺇﻝﺎﻤﺷﻭ EAMENAﻦﻣﺔﻣﺪﻘﻣﺔﺤﻨﻣﻞﻀﻔﺑﻭ
ﺔﻓﺎﻘﺜﻟﺍﺔﻳﺎﻤﺣﻕﻭﺪﻨﺻ.ﺪﻴﺟﻞﻜﺸﺑﻞﺒﻘﺘﺳﺍﺪﻗﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍﻡﺎﻋﻞﻜﺸﺑ.ﺢﺠﻧﺪﻘﻟﻭ
ﺔﺑﻮﻏﺮﻤﻟﺍﺕﺍﺭﺎﻬﻤﻟﺍﺮﺸﻧﻲﻓﻉﻭﺮﺸﻤﻟﺍ،ﺔﺳﺎﻣﺔﺟﺎﺤﺑﺔﻜﻳﺮﺸﻟﺍﺕﺎﺴﺳﺆﻤﻟﺍﻲﺘﻟﺍﻭ
ﺎﻬﻴﻟﺇ،ﻀﻳﺃﻞﻤﻋﻪﻧﺈﻓﻚﻟﺬﻛﴼﺔﻳﺎﻤﺣﻲﻓﺮﺛﺆﺗﻲﺘﻟﺍﺎﻳﺎﻀﻘﻟﺎﺑﻲﻋﻮﻟﺍﺓﺩﺎﻳﺯﻰﻠﻋ
ﺔﻣﺎﻋﻊﻤﺘﺠﻤﻟﺍﻞﺧﺍﺩﻲﻓﺎﻘﺜﻟﺍﺙﺍﺮﺘﻟﺍ.
Introduction
In times of political instability threats to the survival
of heritage sites, such as expanding agriculture,unregulated urban growth, or even deliberate
destruction and looting, tend to be exacerbated
(Rayne et al. 2017a ). At the same time the ability
of heritage management institutions to put in placemitigation strategies can be severely disrupted. Vast
areas also exist in which many, or even the majority,
of archaeological sites are yet to be identified ordocumented, making their protection for future
research purposes impossible. The Endangered
Archaeology of the Middle East and North AfricaProject (EAMENA), a collaboration between the uni-versities of Oxford, Leicester and Durham, gained a
grant from the Arcadia fund in 2015 in the context
of the aftermath of the Arab Spring (Bewley et al.2016 ). The project aims to work with 20 countries
across the MENA region from Mauretania to Iran.
With the rate of destruction increasing the scale ofthe task of heritage management and protection in
this region is huge.
One of the greatest needs is a wider distribution
of skills in new digital technologies which allow a
greater efficiency of heritage management (Therond
and Tragona 2009 ). High resolution satellite
imagery, for example, can be used to identify sitesin certain regions which have yet to receive trad-
itional archaeological field survey. Satellites launched
by the European Space Agency in the last five yearsnow provide freely available medium resolution
imagery, allowing new evidence of damage, or even
emerging threats to preservation, to be analysed ona week-by-week basis from the comfort of a desktop
computer. Accessing such information remotely can
enable heritage managers to allocate their limitedtime and resources where most needed and to remaininformed about the state of preservation of sites in
regions which have become too dangerous to visit.
In order to provide training in such new method-
ologies the EAMENA project was augmented with a
£1.6 million grant from the Cultural Protection Fund
(CPF) in 2017. The grant originally related to sixcountries: Iraq, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, Libya
and Tunisia. Subsequent top-up grants have allowed
Egypt and Yemen to also be included in the trainingprogramme, making eight countries in total. Four
training managers were employed to plan and carryLibyan Studies 50 (2019), pp 63 –71 © The Society for Libyan Studies
doi:10.1017/lis.2019.22
63
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .out the workshops, at the universities of Durham and
Leicester these were also supported by a researchassistant. At the time of writing, 17 of 22 plannedtraining workshops in the EAMENA methodology
have taken place. The final five workshops are sched-
uled to take place in the autumn and winter of 2019,bringing the total number of heritage professionals in
receipt of EAMENA training to over 150. The results
of the six training workshops undertaken by theUniversity of Leicester in partnership with the
Department of Antiquities (DoA) in Libya and with
the Institut National du Patrimoine (INP) inTunisia will be the primary focus of this paper.
The Aims of EAMENA ’s CPF training
A primary aim of the training workshops was to
propagate as widely as possible the application anduse of new digital technologies within the field of
heritage management. The focus has been on the
potential of satellite image interpretation to provideknowledge about the location and condition of
many thousands of archaeological sites, supported
by the use of spatial databases and GeographicalInformation Systems (GIS). A secondary aim was todevelop and cement partnerships, facilitating the cre-
ation of a heritage management community across
the MENA region, which would communicate regu-larly and work together in the endeavour of protect-
ing cultural heritage affected by the Arab Spring
(Joffé 2014 ).
The training workshops functioned in tandem
with the Protecting the Past conference series.
Taking place on an annual basis since 2015, thisconference has helped to focus the efforts of the
heritage community across this vast region on certain
key methods and goals which are held in common.Previous conferences have taken place in Amman,Jordan (2015), Sulaimani, Iraq (2016), Tunis,
Tunisia (2017), Sharjah, UAE (2018) and a forthcom-
ing event is planned for Agadir, Morocco in late 2019.The conference in Tunis in December 2017 followed
directly on from our November training workshops,
allowing all of the workshop participants to attend.A session of the conference was dedicated to the pres-
entation of their training experience and the initial
results of their recording and monitoring work. In2018 an open competition for paper abstracts was
held, with the best CPF participants gaining funding
to support their travel to Sharjah to present at the con-ference. Similar plans are in place to support anothersession involving CPF participants at the conference
to be held in Agadir.The Libyan and Tunisian workshops
The training workshops for Libyan and Tunisian
participants were organised by a Training Managerand Research Assistant employed through theUniversity of Leicester and overseen by Professor
David Mattingly. The six two-week workshops
took place in three pairs, each of which took placein the same hotel in Tunis: Libya/Tunisia Basic
Training 1 in November 2017, Basic Training 2 in
April 2018 and Advanced Training in March 2019.At each basic training we intended to take 10 partici-
pants, training 40 people in total. For the advanced
training a selection of 20 individuals (10 from eachcountry) was to be made from this group of 40. Inaddition to flat-screen monitors used in the training
room, each partner institution received 20 laptops
and 20 handheld GPSs, the use of which was givento the participants for the duration of their time
working with the EAMENA project.
Participants were selected by our partner institu-
tions from within their body of employees following
a number of guideline criteria. It was stipulated that
as far as possible all regions of the countries involvedshould be represented, with efforts made to achieve
an equal gender balance where possible. It was
requested that those attending the workshops shouldhave general computer skills and have heritage man-agement as their primary job role. In Tunisia the
majority had the job title of conservator, although
with varying degrees of seniority ( Figure 1 ). They
have general responsibilities regarding development
control within the area administered by their
regional offices. Architects responsible for standingbuildings and monuments formed another significant
group, with a smaller number of museum curators
and researchers. A handful had completed doctoralresearch in the field of archaeology, and most wereundertaking some form of doctoral or postgraduate
study. In Libya, the majority were development
control archaeologists or civil engineers withresponsibilities for projects affecting heritage sites
(Figure 2 ). A number possessed degrees and post-
graduate degrees in archaeology. One gentleman, thecontroller of the south of the country, has completed
doctoral research in the subject area of prehistory.
In any given week the training team consisted of
a minimum of five tutors: three project employees,
supported by two Libyan nationals who also trans-
lated lesson content. All tutors possessed PhDs inarchaeology, the majority related to North Africa.We were very fortunate to have four dedicated indi-
viduals performing the role of tutor/translator, all of
whom gained PhDs from the University of Leicester ’s
64MATTHEW HOBSON
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .School of Archaeology and Ancient History, and
went on to work in Higher Education within Libya.
A total of 12 EAMENA staff visited Tunisia to be
involved in the training workshops as tutors forvarying lengths of time. The Training Manager was
present for the entirety of each programme, with
long stints also completed by Dr Nichole Sheldrick,Dr Julia Nikolaus and Dr Louise Rayne. The remote-
sensing expertise provided by Dr Rayne in particular
was crucial to the success of the advanced work-shops. Finally, the EAMENA directors and members
of the British Council also made a number of visits to
observe the training and interact with the trainees.Methods and new technologies
The EAMENA project ’s work in both Libya and
Tunisia has been able to expand on previous capacity
building projects on the one hand, and to take advan-
tage of recent technological developments and openaccess initiatives on the other. Euromed Heritage
I-IV along with UNESCO and World Bank initia-
tives, for example, have invested millions inTunisia ’s heritage sphere. Digital recording systems
based on international standards developed by the
Gestion du patrimoine (Julien 2003 ; Lavecchia
2003 ) and IPAMED projects (ARS and GHK 2004 ,
21–27) can be seen as direct predecessors of the
Figure 1. The Tunisian Participants.
65EAMENA TRAINING IN THE USE OF SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .modified Arches system employed by the EAMENA
project (Zerbini 2018 ). Libya, by contrast, has been
involved in fewer capacity building projects, butthere is a line of continuity linking the Cultural
Protection Fund grants to the EAMENA and
Training in Action projects with the curtailed train-ing work conducted by the University of Leicester
in 2011, and the work of the American Mission in
Libya between 2005 and 2016 (Kane et al. 2017 ).
A number of fortunate and timely developments
in information technology and remote sensing have
allowed us to use almost exclusively open-sourcesoftware and open-access data. This has ensuredaffordability for heritage management institutions
with limited budgets, and at the same time has
opened up the skills set we wish to teach to a fargreater number of potential students. Perhaps the
most important development in this direction hasbeen the launch of the series of Sentinel satellites
by the European Space Agency. Previously, free satel-lite imagery available through platforms such asGoogle Earth Pro, although higher in resolution,
had been usable only to detect historic damage to
sites. Imagery captured by the Sentinel 2a satellite,launched on 23 June 23 2015, and the Sentinel 2b
satellite, launched on 7 March 2017, offers global
coverage at 10 m resolution on a weekly basis. Thishas created a revolutionary opportunity to detect
degradation to archaeological sites caused by urban
growth, agricultural expansion, or infrastructuraldevelopment projects as it occurs (Tapete andCigna 2018 ).
In order for this new imagery to be used success-
fully, however, it is also necessary to acquire a set ofcomplementary skills. First of all, knowledge about
the location and nature of archaeological sites
Figure 2. The Libyan Participants.
66MATTHEW HOBSON
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .needs to be collected in a spatial database, requiring
at least basic database entry and querying skillsfrom the heritage manager or researcher. To beable to view this information and overlay the most
recently available satellite imagery requires an
acquaintance with Geographic Information Systems(GIS). The EAMENA project has been able to rely
on the open-source database software PostgreSQL
for its spatial databases, communicating with theopen-source QGIS via PostGIS in order to conduct
analysis. This has solved the once severe problem
of expensive software licenses, which previouslyinhibited the spread of skills in this area.
A third development of fundamental importance
has been the establishment of Google Earth Engine
(GEE) from late 2010 onwards, reaching widespreaduse in academia from about 2016 (Gorelick et al.
2017 ; Kumar and Mutanga 2018 ). With a user-
friendly interface, the processing power of super-computers can now be leveraged from the most
basic personal computer. GEE can be used for
many analytical functions. During the training work-shops we used GEE and Sentinel 2 imagery to
observe the current state of expanding quarries,
housing estates, and agricultural farms in Libya andTunisia, and their relationship to archaeological sites(Figure 5 ). We were also able to compare the more
recent Sentinel imagery with historic imagery taken
during the 1980s by the Landsat 5 satellite, forexample, to observe the scale of change over time.
For this purpose we also used the GEE Timelapse
website as a platform for generating discussion aboutthe major threats in various regions ( Figure 3 ). More
advanced uses of GEE have also been developed by
Dr Louise Rayne at the University of Leicester inwhich Sentinel 2 imagery can be used to automaticallydetect significant pixel change in the vicinity of arch-
aeological sites, using points and polygons of sitelocations entered into the spatial database by our par-
ticipants. Such pixel change may well be indicative ofdamage or significant threat to archaeological preser-vation, and in the coming months we hope to trial
such automatic detection with fieldwork conducted
by our participants. This fieldwork will ground-truththe significance of automated alerts and validate the
remote sensing workflow.
Considerable effort was expended in producing
the majority of training materials in both English
and Arabic so that they can be followed by most peo-
ple in the MENA region in possession of a laptopand with access to the internet. A combined resultof the project ’s positive ethos towards the sharing
of skills and of the current academic environment,
which has encouraged the development of open-source software and remote-sensing data, each of
our participants is now able to share the skills they
have acquired with friends and colleagues.Thousands of interested individuals from beyond
our partner institutions have been accessing our
training content in online videos. Portable exhibi-tions introducing the archaeology of each country,
and the threats it faces, were also produced as part
of the CPF grant, in English and Arabic for Libyaand in French and Arabic for Tunisia. Physical copiesof the exhibition were deployed in-country in early
2019 and an online version will follow very soon.
Workshop content
From the above it will already be clear that the con-
tent of the workshops was highly technical, with anumber of different software programmes being
introduced. We structured the two-week basic train-
ing workshops to move from basic principles to morecomplex analysis. In the beginning we worked with
clear examples of archaeological sites visible on satel-
lite imagery, followed by the introduction of GoogleEarth Pro. We quickly moved from the use of well-known or clear archaeological examples to encour-
aging the participants to examine satellite imagery
of sites from within their own regions of responsibil-ity and expertise, familiarising them with a standar-
dised glossary of terms (Rayne et al. 2017a ,
Section 2.2).
By the end of the first week each participant had
chosen a study region of about 650 km
2defined by a
grid based on WGS 1984, which they would thenwork with over the following months ( Figure 4 ).
Study within their chosen region involved the
recording of previously known sites from surveys
and archives, as well as the discovery of unrecordedsites through the inspection of high-resolution satel-
lite imagery. We moved through the various
Figure 3. Tunisian Heritage professionals discuss
threats to archaeological preservation.
67EAMENA TRAINING IN THE USE OF SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .elements of spatial database functionality, from data
entry to querying and analysis. An afternoon of GPStraining at an archaeological site was included whichinvolved loading data into the GPS and downloading
data from it. Participants were encouraged to use
GPS in the course of their everyday work, to locatesites they had seen on satellite imagery, or to record
the location of sites that they knew the location of on
the ground. At the end of the two-week initial courseparticipants were able to analyse and categorise data
from their chosen regions in various ways, including
satellite image analysis, and to make maps andfigures of the resulting patterns using QGIS.Presentations given on the final day of the workshop
included figures made by the participants with data
from their chosen study regions, including conditionassessment and damage causes.
Between basic training and advanced training
participants were given the task of continuing datacollection and analysis within their chosen
EAMENA grid square. The participants were
allowed to continue working with a laptop andGPS donated by the EAMENA project to their part-
ner institution. A total of over 3,000 sites was
recorded by the two groups of participants at thisstage. Reports on the distribution of archaeologywithin each study region and the major patterns of
damage and threat formed the basis of the selection
process for the advanced training workshops.
Advanced training involved continuing the
momentum of data collection in each personal
study region and collecting feedback about the chal-lenges the participants faced during data collection.
Severe examples of threat and damage to archaeo-
logical sites were discussed and remote-sensing andGIS skills revised. We also focussed more closelyon skills with GEE and introduced a version of
Open Foris ’Collect Earth programme, adapted by
Louise Rayne to allow data entry to the training data-bases directly from Google Earth Pro ’s user interface.
Results and the future
Despite the best efforts of the INP and DoA damage
to archaeological sites within Libya and Tunisia was
recorded in each of the zones investigated. InTunisia the archaeological sites have been affected
by considerable urban and agricultural expansion
(Gutron 2010 ; Nardella and Cidre 2016 ). The well-
known ‘Save Carthage ’excavations funded by
UNESCO in the 1970s provide one example of miti-
gation against the threat of urban expansion (Ennabli
1992 ). A contrasting story is told by the current state
of the important site of Sabra El Mansouria on the
outskirts of Kairouan, now largely built over. In thelast decades, large infrastructural projects, such as
the construction of dams for reservoirs at Tabarkaand Siliana have had a large impact, as has the con-struction of Enfida airport, with little archaeological
mitigation work. The scale of destruction and pollu-
tion of prehistoric sites in the phosphate producingregions of the central south is massive. Plans to
begin phosphate extraction at the Sraa Ouertane
mine, should they go ahead, would destroy largeparts of a prehistoric funerary landscape around
the Numidian and Roman town of Althiburos (Ben
Baaziz 1986 ,2000 ; Kallala et al. 2017 ). Smaller
scale stone quarrying is, however, also a constantthreat to numerous sites. The worst example is prob-
ably the stone quarry at the Roman and Byzantine
town site of Thelepte.
The recording of many thousands of ancient sites
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in
the archaeological Atlases provides an opportunity toquantify the number of sites now overbuilt, or being
degraded considerably by agricultural ploughing
(Babelon et al. 1892 –1913 ; Cagnat and Merlin
1914 –1932 ). In addition to the old archaeological
atlases, which contain a bias towards classical sites,
the INP has been conducting archaeological surveyon a large scale during the last two decades andupdating a central database of site locations inherited
from the above mentioned IPAMED project
(Institute National du Patrimoine and EuromedHeritage 2004 ). The locations of tens of thousands
of archaeological sites are known, but access to the
information is currently not being shared as effi-ciently as it could be with the development control
officers. Developer-funded archaeological investiga-
tion is not practised in either Libya or Tunisia,although the INP will experiment with this modelduring the planned construction a new road between
Tunis and Kairouan in the near future.
In Libya no national centralised database of arch-
aeological sites yet exists and collating all of the avail-
able information concerning the location of
archaeological sites, from old military maps, surveysconducted by the Department of Antiquities, foreign
research teams and oil companies is a task of extreme
urgency. The recorded distribution is heavily biasedtowards the north of the country. Insufficient arch-
aeological survey work has been undertaken in the
southern regions, which are being affected by oilextraction and expanding agriculture, to allowdetailed mitigation strategies to be developed
(Mattingly 2006 ). Heritage managers in Libya are
working in a very difficult context in which it isextremely difficult to enforce the law and to prevent
damage even to some of the most important world
68MATTHEW HOBSON
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .heritage sites. In 2016 all five of Libya ’s World
Heritage sites were put on UNESCO ’s endangered
list. Deterioration of state infrastructure from 2011onwards, combined with a building boom in a num-
ber of regions following the revolution, has resulted
in severe threats to archaeological sites from urbangrowth (Rayne et al. 2017b ).
An associated effect of this is the huge surface
area being disturbed by the practice of quarrying toproduce cement. In the hinterland of Lepcis Magna
there has been huge expansion of quarrying relating
to cement factories destroying and threatening thepreservation of numerous ancient farm sites.
Quarrying activity on the coast just east of
Sabratha, near the amphitheatre, needs urgent miti-gation and recording work. A region known as theline of quarries is also having a large impact on the
landscape east of Benghazi. As noted recently inthis journal and elsewhere, the archaeological land-scape around Cyrene is suffering greatly due to the
unregulated urban expansion of Shahat and sur-
rounding settlements and this can be witnessed in sat-ellite data (Bennett and Abdulkariem 2014 ; Rayne
et al. 2017b ; Tapete and Cigna 2018 ). A large area
in the vicinity of Villa Silin containing importantarchaeological sites (Munzi et al. 2004 ) has been
bulldozed in recent years. In more remote areas
where the threat of urban development and agricul-tural expansion is less, significant levels of looting
have been identified. Little to no archaeological miti-
gation work was carried out in association with theconstruction of the Great Man-made River duringthe 1980s and 90s, which has since had a negative
impact on archaeological sites through the expansion
of irrigated agriculture. Indeed, in a number of desertenvironments there has been a massive increase in the
area exploited for agriculture, resulting from drill
holes exploiting palaeowater reservoirs (e.g. in avast region south of Sebha). This is having a negative
impact on surface scatters of prehistoric artefacts of
international scientific interest and importance.
The EAMENA project and in particular the
training has been crucial for developing a discourse
about the past, present and future of heritage man-
agement strategies in these two countries, the impactof which should be felt for years to come. During the
initial evaluation process we learned that the training
Figure 4. The location of the chosen study regions in Tunisia and Libya.
Figure 5. The Libyan participants examining Sentinel
2 imagery using Google Earth Engine.
69EAMENA TRAINING IN THE USE OF SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .events were very well received by the participants
and by our partner institutions, with both advancedgroups expressing their interest in forming dedicatedresearch teams on the subject of digital technologies
and heritage management. Indeed, many of the par-
ticipants now use the skills and equipment intro-duced by EAMENA in their everyday work and
will continue to develop their regional case studies.
One extremely positive result has come from a recentgrant scheme offered to EAMENA training partici-
pants by Global Heritage Fund and through the gen-
erous sponsorship of the J.M. Kaplan Fund. ATunisian/Libyan team headed by Héla Mekki wonthe largest of three available grants for the purpose
of conducting survey in a poorly studied region span-
ning southern Tunisia and northwest Libya knownfor its troglodyte houses. The end result of the pro-
ject will be a detailed evaluation and mitigation
plan for some of the most important and most threa-tened archaeological sites of this region.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the project directors Bob Bewley,
Andrew Wilson, David Mattingly and Graham Philip for
the trust they put in me in the role of CPF TrainingManager for Libya and Tunisia. As a team we are verygrateful to the Arcadia Fund for enabling core EAMENA
staff members to come out to Tunis at various times to sup-
port the training. Heartfelt thanks are extended to theCultural Protection Fund Grant Managers for the very
existence of the Training in Endangered Archaeology
Methodology project and for the encouragement theygave when visiting Tunis for the Protecting the Past confer-
ence in 2017. We received a great deal of help from mul-
tiple individuals within the British Council, the BritishEmbassy and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Inparticular I would like to thank former Libya Country dir-
ector at the British Council Tony Calderbank for his help
on two occasions with transporting the expensive com-
puter and GPS equipment from the UK to Tunisia. Tonyshowed us great hospitality on our first visit to Tunis.
His interest in visiting the training workshops and talking
with the participants was mirrored by Robert Ness, BenLawton, Faisal Alnajah, Angus McKee and Justin Spence.
We are extremely grateful to Her Excellency Louise de
Sousa, British Ambassador to Tunisia, for generously host-ing our closing certificate award ceremony on two occa-
sions in 2018 and 2019.
Organisation of the training work would not have
been possible without the friendly cooperation of FaouziMahfoudh and Taoufik Redissi at the INP in Tunisia and
Mohamed Shakshuki, Ahmed Abdulkariem, Mustafa
Turjman and Saleh Alhasi at the DoA in Libya. Thesegentlemen gave us help and support in selecting our parti-
cipants and allowing them time to attend the workshops. I
thank Muftah AlHddad, Ahmad Emrage, Ahmed Buzaianand Mohamed Abdrbba for their hard work, enthusiasm
for protecting cultural heritage, and companionship during
the workshops. To Moez Achour, who very kindly put onthe EAMENA Tunisia exhibition at the Carthage NationalMuseum in March 2019, we extend heartfelt thanks.
Finally I thank the participants themselves, who
really applied themselves to the tasks we set and whotaught us so much in return about the realities of current
heritage management in Tunisia and Libya. Many of the
participants provided images and content for theEAMENA exhibitions which are now on tour for local
communities to see. Faouzi Ghozzi helped enormously
with day-to-day communications. The Tunisian teamvery generously hosted us in a joint visit to the Bardo
museum and for GPS training exercises at sites in
Carthage and for site visits to Oudhna.
References
ARS and GHK. 2004. Evaluation of Euromed Heritage
I. Final report. Volume II. Evaluation of single pro-jects. European Union.
Babelon, E., Cagnat, R., Reinach, S., and Merlin, A.
1892 –1913. Atlas Archéologique de la Tunisie . 2nd
edition. E. Leroux, Paris.
Ben Baaziz, S. 1986. L ’occupation humaine dans la
plaine de Rohia et le Sraa Ouertane dansl’antiquité. Histoire et l ’Archéologie de l ’Afrique du
Nord, 4e Colloque . Paris: 111e Congrès national
des Sociétés savant: 289 –300.
Ben Baaziz, S. 2000. Rohia et le Sraa Ouertane dans
l’antiquité . INP, Tunis.Bennett, P. and Abdulkariem, A. 2014. Libyan heritage
under threat: the case of Cyrene. Libyan Studies 45:
155 –61.
Bewley, R., Wilson, A., Kennedy, D., Mattingly, D.J.,
et al . 2016. Endangered Archaeology in the
Middle East and North Africa: Introducingthe EAMENA Project. In S. Campana,
R. Scopigno, G. Carpentiero, and M. Cirillo (eds),
CAA2015. Keep the Revolution Going: Proceedingsof the 43rd Annual Conference on Computer
Applications and Quantitative Methods in
Archaeology . Archaeopress, Oxford: 919 –932.
Cagnat, R. and Merlin, A. 1914 –1932. Atlas
Archéologique de la Tunisie . Deuxième série. E.
Leroux, Paris.
70MATTHEW HOBSON
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .Ennabli, A. (ed) 1992. Pour sauver Carthage.
Exploration et conservation de la cité punique,
romaine et byzantine . UNESCO, Paris.
Gorelick, N., Hancher, M., Dixon, M., Ilyushchenko, S.,
et al . 2017. Google Earth Engine: Planetary-scale
geospatial analysis for everyone. Remote Sensing of
Environment 202: 18 –27.
Gutron, C. 2010. L’archéologie en Tunisie (XIXe-XXe
siècles) : jeux généalogiques sur l ’Antiquité .
Karthala, Paris.
Institute National Du Patrimoine and Euromed
Heritage. 2004. IPAMED. Carte informatisée du
Patrimoine . Republique Tunisienne. Ministère de
la Culture, de la Jeunesse et des Loisirs, Tunis.
Joffé, G. 2014. The Maghreb in the twenty-first cen-
tury. In A. Hussey and M. Rose (eds), The challange
of North Africa . SENAR, London/Paris: 9 –24.
Julien, M. 2003. Atlas des monuments historiques
classés de Tunisie. In Situ 3.
Kallala, N., Sanmarti, J., and Carme Belarte, M.
2017. Althiburos III. La nécropole protohistorique
d’Athiburos-massif du Ksour . Documentia 30.
University of Barcelona, INP and ICAC.
Kane, S., Raynolds, W., and Carrier, S. 2017. American
Mission activities in Libya 2005 –16: report. Libyan
Studies 48: 135 –147.
Kumar, L. and Mutanga, O. 2018. Google Earth Engine
Applications Since Inception: Usage, Trends, and
Potential. Remote Sensing 10.10: 1509.
Lavecchia, F. 2003. Les fiches d ’indexation minimale du
conseil de l ’Europe pour l ’inventaire normalisé du
patrimoine culturel mondial. In Situ 3.Mattingly, D.J. 2006. The Libyan desert : natural
resources and cultural heritage . Society for Libyan
Studies, London.
Munzi, M., Felici, F., Cifani, G., Cirelli, E., et al .
2004. A topographic research sample in the terri-
tory of Lepcis Magna: Silin. Libyan Studies 35:
11–66.
Nardella, B.M. and Cidre, E. 2016. Interrogating the
‘implementation ’of international policies of urban
conservation in the medina of Tunis. In S. Labadiand W. Logan (eds), Urban heritage, development
and sustainability. International frameworks,
national and local governance . Routledge, London:
57–79.
Rayne, L., Bradbury, J., Mattingly, D.J., Philip, G., et al.
2017a. From above and on the ground: GeospatialMethods for Recording Endangered Archaeology
in the Middle East and North Africa. Geosciences
7(4): 100.
Rayne, L., Sheldrick, N., and Nikolaus, J. 2017b.
Endangered Archaeology in Libya: Recording dam-
age and destruction. Libyan Studies 48: 23 –49.
Tapete, D. and Cigna, F. 2018. Appraisal of Opportunities
and Perspectives for the Systematic Condition
Assessment of Heritage Sites with Copernicus
Sentinel-2 High-Resolution Multispectral Imagery.Remote Sensing 10.4: 561.
Therond, D. and Tragona, A. (eds) 2009. Heritage and
Beyond . Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Zerbini, A. 2018. Developing a Heritage Database for
the Middle East and North Africa. J. Field
Archaeol . 43 (Supplement 1): 9 –18.
71EAMENA TRAINING IN THE USE OF SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING
https://doi.org/10.1017/lis.2019.22Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . La Trobe University , on 25 Oct 2019 at 22:22:16 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms .