http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
Reading & Writing - Journal of the Reading Association of South Africa  
ISSN: (Online) 2308-1422, (Print) 2079-8245
Page 1 of 9 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.Author:
Caroline Pade-Khene1 
Affiliation:
1Department of Information 
Systems, Rhodes University, 
South Africa
Corresponding author:
Caroline Pade-Khene, 
c.khene@ru.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 17 Dec. 2017
Accepted: 11 May 2018
Published: 27 July 2018
How to cite this article:
Pade-Khene, C., 2018, 
‘Embedding knowledge 
transfer in digital citizen 
engagement in South Africa: 
Developing digital literacy’, 
Reading & Writing 9(1), a193. 
https://doi.org/10.4102/
rw.v9i1.193  
Copyright:
© 2018. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.Introduction
Although South Africa possesses a progressive legislative framework for service delivery, when it 
comes to implementation at the local level, the reality is different (Tissington et al. 2008). Especially 
disconcerting is the lack of services in predominantly poor communities, rural areas and informal 
settlements of South Africa (Algotsson et al. 2009). Service distribution inequalities emanated 
from the past; apartheid legacy have left high levels of imbalance in access to resources, 
infrastructure and social services (Nnadozie 2013; Tissington et al. 2008). A lack of service delivery 
in these areas infringes on the rights of vulnerable citizens to basic services, such as clean water, 
sanitation, electricity and housing . Particularly pertinent to service delivery in South Africa is the 
need to institute effective and efficient channels of communication between multi-stakeholder 
groups involved and affected by service provision processes. It is essential that local government 
engages in two-way interaction, giving citizens a stake in decision-making with the objective of 
improving service delivery outcomes, especially in marginalised contexts. Engagement is vital in 
policy-making as it informs people of public issues, drives citizens towards a common ground 
that can break legislative deadlocks and increases the accountability of elected officials. Citizens 
in vulnerable contexts are often unaware of their rights, nor do they have the capacity to effectively 
engage with government.
Citizen engagement is widely promoted as a ‘game changer’ for development (Gaventa & Barrett 
2012), as the voiceless become empowered to evoke change in society. Building citizen engagement 
should be examined by identifying ways to increase participation, such as showing results from 
engagement, designing multiple channels of participation, providing multitiered levels of 
engagement, reinforcing a sense of civic duty and collectiveness and getting precommitment from 
citizens (Spada et al. 2015). The concept of citizen engagement and citizen participation is universal 
and fundamental to supporting accountability and transparency of government service delivery; 
however, each global context differs in terms of the effectiveness to deliver and voice the needs of 
citizens and vulnerable groups. Citizen engagement is not a straightforward process, especially in 
resource-constrained contexts where citizens have not had the capacity and knowledge of their Basic service delivery is a fundamental right for all South Africans, especially vulnerable 
groups. Effective and efficient channels of communication between multi-stakeholder groups 
involved and affected by service delivery are essential. Digital citizen engagement has recently 
emerged as a key approach for supporting two-way communication between citizens and the 
government. It is essential for building evidence-based data to engage with government and 
apply social accountability measures to lobby for the provision of basic services. Key to 
building capacities and learning, is developing the abilities of both local government and 
citizens to become digitally literate (including civic and responsiveness literacy), in order to 
realise and action the true benefits of digital citizen engagement. This research set out to 
identify the roles of digital literacy in digital citizen engagement, and how it may be embedded 
in knowledge transfer processes for implementing digital citizen engagement initiatives. A 
pragmatist philosophical approach was applied: studying, observing and reflecting on actions 
in the MobiSAM case study. Using Szulanski’s four-stage model of knowledge transfer, key 
focus areas for developing digital literacy were identified, contributing to a Quadruple-E 
process of: (1) explore, (2) enable, (3) engage and (4) embed. Practices identified in the 
MobiSAM case study are provided as suggestions for each phase, with an indication of possible 
constraints that may be experienced in the knowledge transfer and digital literacy development 
process – a potential guideline for developing digital literacy in digital citizen engagement 
initiatives. The process for knowledge transfer and developing digital literacy that was 
identified in this article provides a guideline for future implementation of digital citizen 
engagement initiatives in resource-constrained contexts.Embedding knowledge transfer in digital citizen 
engagement in South Africa: Developing digital literacy
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.Page 2 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
rights to hold government accountable. Coupled with this, 
local government in resource-constrained contexts often do 
not have the capacity and rightly shaped institutional cultural 
to engage in such initiatives – resulting in a lack of government 
responsiveness. Digital citizen engagement (DCE) has 
emerged over the recent years as a key tool to enable this 
much needed two-way communication and engagement 
between citizens and government (Peixoto & Fox 2016). 
Digital citizen engagement is defined as (Haikin et al. 
2016): ‘The use of new media/digital information and 
communication technologies to create or enhance the 
communication channels which facilitate the interaction 
between citizens and governments or the private sector’ . 
Information and communication technology (ICT) is not 
necessarily a panacea for many challenges being faced in the 
service delivery sector in developing countries; however, an 
ICT-enabled environment could be one of many significant 
means to support service delivery. Examples of key initiatives 
include Ushahidi, FixMyStreet, Maji Voice and MobiSAM. 
Residents use these platforms to report on service delivery 
issues, and track the progress in getting them addressed. 
Digital citizen engagement initiatives can play the role of 
bringing together the voices of individual reports, and 
collective action by activists and civil society organisations 
(CSOs) (illustrated in Figure 1 by Peixoto and Fox [2016]). 
Typically, a citizen would report a service issue directly to a 
municipality that remains as an undisclosed individual 
report, which the general public is unaware of. On the 
contrary, civil society attempts to lobby for more collective 
actions on certain issues reported to collective groups, which 
can at times be isolated and insufficiently reflect the true 
nature of the service delivery issue in the population. The role 
of ICTs is to bring together individual and collective action 
with real-time access to mechanisms to report issues to all 
stakeholders.
Despite the opportunities that exist with ICT and citizen 
engagement, the implementation and beneficial realisation 
of these initiatives by both citizens and government is not 
easy. Digital citizen engagement projects have not yielded the expected benefits to all key stakeholders, resulting in 
much scepticism around supporting such projects. This is 
also quite typical of many ICT for development (ICT4D) 
projects in developing countries. Nevertheless, this does 
not imply that such projects do not have successful outcomes 
– these outcomes can only be fully realised when an effort is 
made to apply endogenous practices to understand 
institutional forces that support or hinder implementation 
and sustainability (Mansell 2011). The failures and 
challenges should be seen by researchers and practitioners 
as opportunities to learn from them, unlearn wrong 
practices and apply incremental changes or develop 
possible mechanisms and theories to address these specific 
failures (Dodson, Sterling & Bennett 2012; Pade-Khene & 
Lannon 2017).
The process of learning from failures, and unlearning 
existing practices that hinder progress, requires a process of 
continuous engagement with key stakeholders in a DCE 
initiative, that is, government and citizens. Toyama (2011) 
points out three fundamental institutional forces that 
influence engagement with ICTs in different contexts: 
differential access, differential capacity and differential 
motivation. These aspects are often embedded in local 
practice and context (endogenous practice); therefore, 
practitioners and researchers need to learn in the local 
context to obtain insight into the factors that influence DCE. 
Furthermore, they need to engage in participatory approaches 
with key beneficiaries, allowing multiple perspectives to 
emerge in an open dialogue of knowledge transfer and 
incremental learning through a consultative process of 
decision-making (Ika & Hodgson 2014; Mansell 2011; Toyama 
2015). Key to building capacities and learning is developing 
the abilities of both local government and citizens to become 
digitally literate, in order to realise and action the true 
benefits of DCE. The aim of this article is to present a case for 
digital literacy development in DCE initiatives in South 
Africa. The two research questions addressed in this article 
include the following: (1) What is the role of digital literacy in 
DCE projects in South Africa? (2) How can digital literacy be 
embedded in knowledge transfer processes for implementing 
DCE initiatives?
To set the background for the article, the case for digital 
literacy and how it is positioned as an outcome of knowledge 
transfer is discussed in a literature review. Subsequently, a 
case study of a DCE project called MobiSAM is presented as 
a reflective case, where a pragmatist approach was applied to 
investigate the development of digital literacy for DCE. 
Szulanski’s (1996) four-stage model is applied as a foundation 
to build an iterative process for developing digital literacy in 
DCE projects at local government level in the South African 
context. The conclusion summarises the findings and 
concludes that the process for knowledge transfer and 
developing digital literacy that is identified in this article can 
provide a guideline for future implementation of DCE in 
resource-constrained contexts.Civic ac/g415onCi/g415zen eng agement
Mobi SAMPublic Undisclose d
Individual Collec/g415v eCi/g415zen
feedback /
repor/g415ng
Source : Adapted from Peixoto, T. & Fox, J., 2016, When does ICT-enabled citizen voice lead to 
government responsiveness? , World Bank, Washington, DC
FIGURE 1: What citizen engagement means in MobiSAM.Page 3 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
The role of digital literacy in digital 
citizen engagement
Digital literacy emerged from the concept of the digital divide, 
which has traditionally been used to describe the inequalities 
that exist between those who can engage in the digital society 
and those who cannot (Evans & Gomes 2017). This is quite 
pertinent in developing countries, where deducing the digital 
divide was mainly based on aspects of access to technology 
to participate in society – the first-order effect of the digital 
divide. Toyama (2015) argues against this limited view of 
unequal access in the information society, as ‘access’ not only 
goes beyond access to technology or infrastructure, but also 
considers issues of capacity and motivation to effectively and 
strategically use technology for its intended purpose – in the 
case of this article, to use technology to participate in citizen 
engagement. This resulted in what authors call, the second-
order  effect of the digital divide – which moves beyond access 
to also consider social access or the lack of skill to take 
advantage of ICTs (Evans & Gomes 2017; Henninger 2017; 
Huerta & Sandoval-Almazan 2007). The second-order effect 
relates to digital literacy, which has now become the focus 
towards addressing inequalities in the information society. 
The definition of digital literacy seems to vary in the literature, 
with authors providing general definitions that can apply to 
different domains of use. This was studied by Leahy and 
Dolan (2009), who provide a historical account of the defined 
meaning of digital literacy, before they settled on the definition 
provided by the European Union:
Digital Literacy involves the confident and critical use of 
Information Society Technology for work, leisure and 
communication. It is underpinned by Basic skills in ICT: the use 
of computers to retrieve, assess, store, produce, present and 
exchange information, and to communicate and participate in 
collaborative networks via the internet. (p. 152)
The definition by the European Union seems to be more 
specific towards the technical skill needed to use technology. 
Eshet-Alkalai (2004), on the contrary, speaks to more complex 
skills associated with digital literacy, such as cognitive, 
motoric, sociological and emotional – all needed to use digital 
environments effectively. He differentiates between five types 
of digital literacy, which can gradually develop over time 
through different exercises or knowledge transfer processes 
between project implementers, and project beneficiaries 
(government and citizens) (Leahy & Dolan 2009). These 
include photo-visual literacy, reproduction literacy, branching 
literacy, information literacy and socio-emotional literacy 
(Eshet-Alkalai 2004). All these types possibly contribute to 
developing the digital citizen (Coldwell-Neilson 2017) – one 
who is able to purposefully and confidently communicate and 
find information to engage in processes to address some of 
their challenges.
When we interrogate the meaning of digital literacy in the 
field of DCE, there are key skills and knowledge that both 
citizens and government need to possess in order to 
effectively engage in the process. In this case, government and citizens do not only need to be digitally literate but also 
need to be civically literate (Henninger 2017). For digital 
literacy, what is paramount is that citizens have the capacity 
to find, retrieve, interpret and critically evaluate information 
provided on digital platforms. Civic literacy supports digital 
literacy in DCE, as citizens also possess the domain 
knowledge, ability and capacity to make sense of their 
political world and hence effectively act individually or 
collectively to hold government accountable and demand 
key services (Henninger 2017). Digital literacy applies to both 
government and citizens; however, civic literacy is more 
specific to citizens. Literature does not clearly articulate the 
domain literacy that governments should possess to 
effectively participate in DCE. This is quite typical in the field 
of citizen engagement, as the focus has mainly been on 
citizens, where initiatives have taken on an adversarial 
approach to implementation. However, recent literature has 
motivated for focusing on building the capacity for 
government responsiveness, to respond to citizen requests 
and engagement on digital platforms (Daskal 2018; Gigler & 
Bailur 2014; Pade-Khene, Thinyane & Machiri 2017; Peixoto 
& Fox 2016). This is not a forthright process, and at times 
requires process re-engineering and an understanding of the 
valuable contribution of DCE, for government – any citizen 
engagement initiative is often looked at by government with 
suspicion to expose their ineffectiveness, rather than support 
their processes. That said, this research article proposes the 
consideration of responsiveness literacy specific to 
government. When we look at digital literacy in DCE, it 
does not exist as a general entity for technology use, but 
incorporates domain knowledge (Baykurt 2011) in relation 
to civic literacy (citizen) and responsiveness literacy 
(government) (see Figure 2).
Given the above conceptual framework of digital literacy, some 
of the challenges and failures of DCE projects relate to a lack of 
appropriate literacy in the above aspects. As a result, how can 
an individual or group become digitally literate if the means to 
do so are inaccessible and unusable (Leahy & Dolan 2009) – is 
civic literacy and responsiveness literacy effectively embedded 
in the implementation process? Organisations that implement 
DCE initiatives need to embed informed processes of 
Digital literacy
CIVIC LITERACYRESPONSIVENESS 
LITERAC Y
FIGURE 2: Reimagining digital literacy for digital citizen engagement.Page 4 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
knowledge transfer between implementers and project 
beneficiaries to build digital literacy. However, each context is 
different, and hence, project implementers need to ensure that 
they are open to learning the endogenous practices of the 
context in order to understand digital literacy deficiencies and 
opportunities (Mansell 2011). These practices need to be applied 
iteratively and incrementally to address barriers and build 
digital literacy. The next sections reflect on this process using 
Szulanski’s four-stage model in the MobiSAM case study.
Research methodology
The philosophical approach adopted for this research is 
pragmatism. This philosophy assists in disclosing the current 
practices associated with DCE initiatives in a local municipality 
and how these practices generate observations to understand 
the phenomenon (Creswell 2014). The pragmatist approach 
allows the researcher to focus their attention on the research 
problem, using various methods to gather information to 
address the problem. Observations and explanations of the 
actors in the research problem context allow for the 
development of knowledge around the aspect of DCE in a 
local municipality of South Africa. Goldkuhl (2012) discusses 
three types of pragmatism: referential, functional and 
methodological. The context of this research study focuses on 
the methodological pragmatism, where the researcher has 
actively participated in the context to provide suggestions and 
implement practices for improvement – in this case, building 
digital literacy. Pragmatism provides researchers with the 
ability to observe, understand, reflect and provide guidelines 
to mediate within a social context (Goldkuhl 2012; Saunders 
et al. 2009). The pragmatist philosophy has not been used 
significantly in research; however, it is instrumental in 
developing change and action, and how knowledge can relate 
to that action (Feilzer 2010; Morgan 2014). This is quite 
fundamental to developing theories within the African context 
(indigenous theory), as information systems theory is quite 
dominated by world views developed in different contexts – 
western and business contexts (Mansell 2011). The premise of 
pragmatism is abductive reasoning, where the researcher 
engages in a process of developing a logical connection 
between theory and empirical data in an iterative fashion. 
Morgan (2014:1049) describes this as ‘… an active process of 
inquiry that creates a continual back-and-forth movement 
between beliefs and actions’ . Therefore, the data collection and 
analysis process in pragmatist research differs from typical 
positivist or interpretive research approaches. In this case, 
moving back and forth between induction and deduction, in 
an enquiry process of problem-solving, does not limit the 
researcher to a ‘forced choice dichotomy between post 
positivism and constructivism’ (Crewell & Plano Clark 2007:27 
in Feilzer 2010:8), restricted to a particular methodology or 
thought approach. Instead, in the context of uncertainty, 
particularly pertinent in DCE in South Africa, the knowledge 
character in pragmatism is constructive in the form of 
prescriptive knowledge (providing guidelines), normative 
knowledge (exhibiting values) and prospective knowledge 
(suggesting possibilities), which are built from descriptions 
and explanations in the enquiry process (Goldkuhl 2012). This is quite an emancipatory process, not only for the researcher 
but also for the research participants engaged in the process of 
problem-solving.
The research strategy applied is a case study to understand how 
digital literacy is developed in the knowledge process of a DCE 
initiative and why it was the suited approach (Yin 2009). The 
case study is MobiSAM, which is an initiative located in the 
Eastern Cape province of South Africa. MobiSAM provides a 
platform for two-way communication between local 
government and citizens on public service delivery issues. It is 
built on an operational model of iterative and incremental 
development, stakeholder engagement, strategy formulation 
and capacity building, comprehensive evaluation and citizen 
education (Pade-Khene et al. 2017). The MobiSAM technology 
incorporates both a reporting interface for citizens (via a mobile 
application [feature phone or smartphone], website and short 
message service [SMS]) and also a ticketing function (mainly 
used by the municipality to address internal communication 
challenges). MobiSAM presents a useful case study to 
demonstrate how knowledge was transferred between various 
stakeholders in the project (including the project 
implementation team), to build digital literacy among key 
beneficiaries – unit of analysis. This is still an ongoing process, 
as digital literacy development is gradual and uncertain, 
considering the factors that hinder DCE implementation, such 
as information poverty, lack of political commitment, digital 
exclusion, internet access and lack of incentive and motivation 
(Gigler, Bailur & Anand 2014). Data were collected using a 
qualitative approach with the following tools:
•	Interviews: Both semi-structured and unstructured 
interviews were applied, to allow understanding from 
the uncertain context to unfold, based on the experience 
of project participants. Government officials, citizens and 
project implementers were interviewed. Government 
officials interviewed included three service department 
managers, three communication and two customer care 
staff, three technicians, and two IT staff. Citizens 
interviewed included civil society representatives and 
community activists.
•	Participant observation: The researcher participated in 
workshops and forums organised by the MobiSAM 
project, civil society and the local municipality. Examples 
of local government meetings included service 
management meetings, special council meetings and 
public forums on service delivery. Civil society forums 
and rights workshops were also organised to bring 
together various stakeholders in the municipality. Lastly, 
MobiSAM held public awareness meetings, needs 
assessment workshop, civil rights workshops, training a 
workshops and strategy formulation workshops.
•	Document analysis: Documentation from the MobiSAM 
project was also analysed to supplement the field data. A 
baseline study report was reviewed to identify key 
communication ecologies and challenges in the 
municipality.
The case study is described in relation to the knowledge 
transfer process by Szulanski (1996), building explanations on Page 5 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
the experiences of project stakeholders and the researcher as a 
key participant in the project. The analysis of data mainly 
relied on abductive reasoning, using Yin’s (2009) analysis 
approach of explanation building. This approach builds an 
explanation about the case, developing causal links in an 
iterative manner. The iterative process was applied as follows:
•	Re-examine the components of the knowledge transfer 
process proposed by Szulanski (1996).
•	Compare the qualitative findings of the observation of 
the project implementation processes that incorporate 
knowledge transfer (consciously and unconsciously – 
given uncertainty), against Szulanski’s knowledge 
transfer model.
•	Contextualise Szulanski’s knowledge transfer process in 
the MobiSAM case – allowing for the emergence of an 
organic process of knowledge transfer in digital literacy 
development.
The above process was repeated at different phases of the 
project from early 2016 to mid-2017. To provide contextual 
background to the study and to build the analysis, the 
stakeholders of the project and their contribution to the 
knowledge transfer process are first identified and discussed 
in the case study description.
Stakeholders of the MobiSAM 
project
Stakeholders in the knowledge transfer process mainly 
consist of the project implementation team and key 
beneficiaries, that is, local government, citizens and civil 
society. Media also plays a key role in the DCE; however, at 
the current stage of the project, this article will not dwell on 
this particular stakeholder. All these stakeholders interact in 
a web of complexity and uncertainty in an environment that 
is politically influenced, as well as marginalised (Pade-Khene & Lannon 2017). Conflicting perspectives exist between 
stakeholders as well as within stakeholder groups – in this 
case, each group has a specific objective that they expect to 
achieve with MobiSAM. Building digital literacy requires 
that all stakeholders engage in a shared understanding of 
how a DCE can be effectively used and embedded in active 
citizenship practices and government responsiveness 
practices. The project manager of a DCE initiative needs to 
devise strategies to engage all key stakeholders (either 
separately or together), in an effort to learn how best the DCE 
initiative can function within its context. Table 1 provides a 
summary of conflicting aspects that emerge in different 
stakeholder groups in the MobiSAM project. It is important 
to know these to highlight the challenges that need to be 
overcome within the iterative process of knowledge transfer 
and digital literacy development. Table 1 also shows the 
literacy focus areas embedded in digital literacy for each 
group, with the exception of the project team that plays the 
role of source or facilitator (where knowledge exists within 
the beneficiary groups) of knowledge transfer.
Knowledge transfer and digital 
literacy development in MobiSAM
Knowledge transfer is a fundamental process for 
organisational learning in the business context. It emerges 
from the need to apply knowledge management as a key 
practice for maintaining and sharing key strategic knowledge 
on business operations. In the context of DCE, this mainly 
relates to managing knowledge that can be used by the 
community or key beneficiaries. Conger (2015) is known to 
be one of the few authors who contextualise knowledge 
management for ICT4D. In the context of ICT4D, knowledge 
managed is defined as a ‘systematic process of acquisition, 
organisation, and communication of organisational member 
knowledge for reuse by others in the community’ (Conger 
TABLE 1:  Conflicting aspects of each stakeholder group.
Stakeholder Conflicting aspects Digital literacy focus areas
Project Team • Diverse mindsets and disciplines: The MobiSAM team has an advantage of being 
diverse in terms of discipline and experience, as a citizen engagement project 
requires diverse perspectives to be more holistic and relevant to the target 
beneficiaries.
• However, project team members’ views can clash, based on their backgrounds – 
for example, some being task-orientated verses people-orientated, more technical 
versus more social. • Mainly the source of building digital literacy.
• However, the role does oscillate between a source  and facilitator of 
knowledge transfer for developing digital literacy for digital citizen 
engagement.
• Diversity of skill is paramount in this groups – hence, working towards a 
shared understanding to implement digital citizen engagement is 
important.
• Context literacy later emerges as a focus area, but not necessarily as part 
of digital literacy.
Citizens • Divided social and economic aspects: This is such a loaded aspect; however, 
perspectives between different groups such as the youth, women, men and 
elderly can conflict.
• In the case of South Africa, income inequalities are still real, and the history of 
apartheid has different groups in very dire living circumstances.
• What is paramount to one citizen may be different for another. Coupled with this 
is a complete lack of trust in government, because of a lack of government 
responsiveness that has plagued local municipalities in marginalised contexts.• Focus area embedded in digital literacy is Civic Literacy.
Civil Society • Conflicting goals and representations:  Civil Society in Makana Municipality is 
quite divided and not enough collaboration exists; yet, they typically share many 
goals. Furthermore, it is typically observed that they have an agenda to hold 
government to account, rather than collaborate, being sensitive to the 
constraints of government.
• A shared goal needs to be nurtured and facilitate among CSOs.• Focus area embedded in digital literacy is Civic Literacy.
Government • Political influence and resource constraints:  Part of the local municipality is 
politically controlled and the other is administratively managed.
• As a result, some decisions are based on political agendas. Furthermore, local 
municipalities are resource-constrained because of ineffective planning – some 
staff who try to work effectively are constrained by this and feel that citizens do 
not understand the challenges experienced. • Focus area embedded in digital literacy is Responsiveness Literacy.
CSO, civil society organisation.Page 6 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
2015:114). Organisational learning is closely linked to the 
process of developing digital literacy for citizens and 
government. Here, organisational learning refers to ‘internal 
adaptation processes triggered by some kind of disjunction 
or unease in the relationship between the organisation and 
what lies external and challenging to it in its environment’ 
(Spender 2008:160). Digital literacy aims to build the capacity 
of citizens and government to effectively participate in DCE – 
this can be performed through a process of learning, training 
and engagement. For digital literacy to develop in the 
MobiSAM project, it had to undergo a process of learning, 
unlearning and knowledge transfer. This process is not 
necessarily linear, but iterative to adapt to changes in the 
complex and uncertain context. Szulanski’s (1996) four-stage 
model presents a process that is used to describe the process 
of knowledge transfer in the MobiSAM case – in describing 
this process, key features and practices of digital literacy 
development at each stage are identified. Knowledge transfer 
occurs through the dyadic exchange of knowledge between a 
source and recipient. For each stakeholder identified in Table 
1, the role of ‘source’ and ‘recipient’ is interchangeable, 
depending on the knowledge shared. The four stages include 
initiation, implementation, ramp-up and integration:
•	Initiation – As the first step in the process, this consists of 
events that lead to a decision to transfer knowledge. In this 
case, the need for knowledge transfer to support DCE is 
identified, as well as the feasibility of such an initiative. 
The constraints of the possible implementation of a DCE 
initiative are also explored in the context. In the MobiSAM 
case study, the project team needed to explore the status of 
digital literacy, including civic literacy and responsiveness 
literacy in the context. This is based on the understanding 
of the communication ecologies of citizens and government 
in relation to civic participation and responsiveness to 
service delivery reporting. A baseline study was conducted, 
which consisted mainly of two surveys: the first survey 
was distributed to citizens and the second survey was 
distributed to local government staff. This survey explored 
the existing approaches for communication and citizen 
participation, identifying traditional ways of engagement 
and the use of technology for engagement between 
government and citizens. In addition to the survey, the 
project team engaged in workshops, informal interviews 
and government public forums to understand the status of 
digital literacy, civic literacy and responsiveness literacy. 
After the baseline study, a needs assessment was conducted 
to explore the key needs related to the use of technology 
for citizen engagement and possible constraints. This was 
a more focused exercise, in relation to the purpose of 
MobiSAM, to provide a platform for social accountability 
monitoring. The purpose of this stage was to therefore 
explore the needs for digital literacy development and the 
feasibility of building digital literacy in the project 
implementation process. This stage is not static and once 
off, as demand-driven needs can emerge as the MobiSAM 
project is adopted in the context. In this case, a needs 
assessment can be reintroduced in project activities to re-
evaluate existing digital literacy needs in the project.•	Implementation – This is the stage where the transfer of 
knowledge begins, and resources flow between the source 
and recipient. The project team acts as a source of 
knowledge for developing digital literacy; however, they 
also become a recipient of new knowledge from citizen 
and governments that shapes their activities to develop 
digital literacy for the context. As a recipient of knowledge, 
they begin to understand protocol, legislation, 
accountability processes, transparency requirements, 
local culture and so on that govern the process of local 
citizen engagement. An understanding of these aspects 
shapes their programme for guiding the development of 
digital literacy to effectively use MobiSAM platforms. In 
this case, government, citizens and civil society become 
the source of knowledge transfer, playing an interactive 
game of learning and informing. The MobiSAM project 
team also played the role of facilitator, in enabling an 
understanding of how to effectively integrate and use the 
MobiSAM platform. This was applied through strategy 
formulation workshops with citizens and government 
(separately and then jointly to manage conflicting views), 
meetings with municipal management staff and CSO 
leadership, engaging in the revision of the municipal 
communication strategy, civic education and adaptive 
ICT training on how to use MobiSAM platforms. An 
important aspect is that social ties begin to develop 
between source and recipient, and stakeholders work 
towards a mutual understanding of how MobiSAM can 
best work in Makana Municipality. Szulanski (1996) 
articulates this as follows:
The transferred practice is often adapted to suit the anticipated 
needs of the recipient, to pre-empt problems experienced in a 
previous transfer of the same practice, or to help make the 
introduction of new knowledge less threatening to the recipient. 
(p. 29)
Initial understanding and development of digital literacy 
is enabled  during this stage of knowledge transfer. 
Furthermore, the project team begins to understand 
contextual dynamics of both government and citizens, 
hence context literacy (endogenous practice) – the 
competence or knowledge to interact and engage in these 
spheres (Mansell 2011). The implementation stage stops, 
when project beneficiaries begin to use the gained 
knowledge on digital literacy.
•	Ramp-up: This is the stage when the recipients of 
knowledge begin to use the new knowledge in the 
context. This was the stage that citizens began to see the 
value of the MobiSAM platforms and engage via the 
Facebook page, email, SMS and the MobiSAM website. In 
relation to the citizen, additional civic education 
workshops had to be held with civil society, media, local 
schools and development centres in Makana Municipality. 
Furthermore, the project had hired ward liaisons in the 
community to impart awareness and knowledge of 
MobiSAM, and based on the train-the-trainer model, 
train local community members in their wards to use the 
various platforms effectively. The value of a new initiative  Page 7 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
can sometimes only be seen and understood from the 
perspective of common members of a networked system, 
whether it is the youth, woman support networks or 
schools. Therefore, MobiSAM activities attempt to 
incorporate key actors involved in these networks in 
order to maximise on participation. This has been a very 
challenging process, as the process of building digital 
literacy for DCE is often met with resistance and lack of 
resources to support development. This is clearly evident 
from Figure 3, which is a map of reported issues – the 
reported issues are centred on a particular location in 
Makana Municipality (more affluent areas), which is 
closer to the centre of town and the local university.
•	It is important that unexpected problems or barriers are 
identified that hinder the alignment of transferred 
knowledge and expected performance of the adapted 
practices (Szulanski 1996). This is no different for local government. Local government staff strategised for the 
integration of MobiSAM in Makana Municipality and 
participated in workshop sessions to re-engineer their 
existing processes to adapt better communication practice 
with MobiSAM. This was successful among some 
municipal staff, who confessed that they now saw the 
value of feedback in communicating with citizens, based 
on the development of their digital literacy around 
government responsiveness. Their original system, 
identified in the initiation stage, showed how broken 
their communication ecology was, with a lack of feedback 
culture and engagement with citizens. Nonetheless, 
MobiSAM was met with much resistance from some 
municipal staff – requiring the MobiSAM project team to 
rethink their implementation approach to address the 
existing constraints. Some social and organisational 
culture constraints may be beyond the scope of MobiSAM 
Source : MobiSAM Website, 2018, Active service delivery issues , MobiSAM, viewed 05 June 2018, from https://mobisam.net/
FIGURE 3:  Map of reported service delivery issues in Makana Municipality.Page 8 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
practices; nonetheless, formulating key partnerships with 
other government officials and CSOs may push for the 
transformation of current practice in the municipality. In 
relation to building digital literacy, this stage relates to 
engaged literacy development.
•	Integration: This stage is reached when digital literacy is 
developed and institutionalised in government and civil 
society practice, as well as becoming an embedded skill of 
active citizens. Satisfactory results of the existence of 
digital literacy should begin to emerge. Certain practices 
related to interaction with evidence-based data for citizen 
engagement and government responsiveness become 
associated with various actors, departments and 
individuals. As digital literacy showed initial progress in 
becoming embedded, MobiSAM became formerly 
integrated into the municipality communication strategy. 
The project team is always invited to participate in key 
strategic forums of the municipality, as digitally literate 
government staff engage in discussions and practices 
around using MobiSAM, and the data generated from it. 
Citizens have also began to use MobiSAM as a point of 
call for reporting issues, perusing the digital platform for 
similarly reported issues to engage in discussion about 
them with an understanding of the severity of the issue. 
Civil societies such as the Grahamstown Residents 
Association (GRA), Public Accountability Monitor 
(PSAM) and Black Sash (BS) now invite MobiSAM as a 
strategic partner into their civic workshops. The evidence 
gathered from the technology platforms is often used by 
the GRA to follow up on unaddressed issues or to lobby 
for key services. Despite the many benefits of having 
reached a level of digital literacy with some stakeholders, 
there are still issues of ‘stickiness’ that hinder the 
effectiveness of the process and call for a continuous 
iterative approach, building on the lessons learned 
from each of the stages of knowledge transfer. Therefore, 
this process should not be linear, but lessons learned 
should feed into another staged iteration of initiation 
to explore emerged aspects of digital literacy and citizen 
engagement.
Table 2 provides a summary of the knowledge transfer 
process of digital literacy development in the MobiSAM DCE 
project. Various practices emerged that can guide each stage 
of literacy development – practices indicated in Table 2 are 
suggestions, but not limited to these, as practitioners or 
researchers may apply different approaches within the 
constraints of the project and context. Nonetheless, this provides a starting point from which to build on. What was 
also identified in the knowledge transfer process was the 
digital literacy development focus at each stage of the transfer 
process. In this case, digital literacy developed through a 
Quadruple-E process of: (1) explore, (2) enable, (3) engage 
and (4) embed.
The transfer of knowledge is likely to experience what 
Szulanski (1996) refers to as internal ‘stickiness’, which is 
based on the characteristics of knowledge transferred, the 
source of the knowledge, recipients of the knowledge (Ajmal 
& Koskinen 2008) and the context (Ajmal & Koskinen 2008; 
Yeh, Lai & Ho 2006). Pade-Khene and Lannon (2017) relate 
this to the issue of power and political influence in DCE – 
diverse stakeholder perspectives and conflicting views result 
in the need for ad hoc solutions as problems emerge in the 
transfer process. Nonetheless, Orlikowski (2002:271) argues 
that it is a gradual process of developing ‘know-how’ in the 
transfer process, so as to understand the origins of stickiness 
in order to work around them and maximise on digital 
literacy development. The issues of stickiness are not foreign 
to the ICT4D field and hence relate a lot to Toyama’s three 
differentials that influence digital implementation in 
developing countries (see Table 3). Project stakeholders need 
to be aware of these and mitigate their influence in the 
knowledge transfer process.
Conclusion
The research study presents a case for developing digital 
literacy in DCE initiatives. This is pertinent as DCE has 
emerged as a key tool in supporting two-way communication 
between citizens and government. It also contributes to 
building evidence-based data that can be used to support 
social accountability and transparency practices. The article 
identifies that DCE is not a straightforward process, where 
some factors that hinder progress relate to a lack of 
effectively building digital literacy among citizens and TABLE 3:  A comparison of information and communication technology for 
development differentials and aspects of stickiness.
Toyama differentials Szulanski’s aspects of ‘stickiness’
Access • Barren organisational context
Capacity • Lack of absorptive capacity
• Lack of retentive capacity
Motivation • Lack of motivation from the source of knowledge
• Source not perceived as reliable
• Lack of motivation to receive knowledge
• Arduous relationship between stakeholders
Note : Please see the full reference list of the article, Pade-Khene, C., 2018, ‘Embedding 
knowledge transfer in digital citizen engagement in South Africa: Developing digital literacy’, 
Reading & Writing 9(1), a193. https://doi.org/10.4102/rw.v9i1.193 , for more information.TABLE 2:  A summary of the knowledge transfer process of digital literacy development.
Stage Practices Digital literacy focus
Initiation Baseline study, needs assessment and relationship building. Explore
Implementation • Strategy formulation, meetings with municipal management staff and CSO leadership,
• engaging in the revision of the municipal communication strategy,
• adaptive training on how to use MobiSAM platforms and civic education workshops.Enable
Ramp-up • Awareness and knowledge campaigns, continued process re-engineering support for local government and continued support for civil 
society engagement.Engage
Integration • Demand-driven needs assessment, continued support for government and citizens and evaluation to understand existing constraints to 
complete integration.Embed
Source : Adapted from Szulanski, G., 1996, ‘Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within the firm’, Strategic Management Journal  17, 27–43. https://doi.
org/10.1002/smj.4250171105Page 9 of 9 Original Research
http://www.rw.org.za Open Access
government as project beneficiaries. In the case of DCE, 
digital literacy does not only relate to the technical ability to 
use ICTs but also relate to embedded competence in civic 
literacy and responsiveness literacy. Using Szulanski’s 
(1996) four-stage process of knowledge transfer, the 
MobiSAM project is reflected on in terms of the practices 
applied to transfer knowledge and develop digital literacy 
of its stakeholders. The process was identified as iterative 
and incremental in nature, with key focus areas for digital 
literacy at the different stages, that is, the Quadruple-E 
process of (1) explore, (2) enable, (3) engage and (4) embed. 
Despite the benefits of knowledge transfer, this process is 
affected by factors that hinder progress, referred to as 
‘stickiness’. The aspects identified relate closely to 
differentials of ICT4D proposed by Toyama (2011) – this 
highlights the significance of addressing digital access, 
motivation and capacity in developing digital literacy; and 
having DCE classified within the field of ICT4D. The 
process for knowledge transfer and developing digital 
literacy that was identified in this article can provide a 
guideline for future implementation of DCE initiatives in 
resource-constrained contexts.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Research 
Foundation of South Africa and the ‘Making All Voices 
Count’ initiative. The researcher also thank the MobiSAM 
team for their continued support and participation in the 
project, and generation of practical experience to reflect on.
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced her 
in writing this article.
References
Ajmal, M. & Koskinen, K., 2008, ‘Knowledge transfer in project-based organisations: 
An organisational culture perspective’, Project Management Journal  39, 7–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pmj.20031
Algotsson, E., Murombo, T., Davis, M. & Poole, M., 2009, Water supply and sanitation 
in South Africa: Environmental rights and municipal accountability , Lawyers for 
Human Rights, Cape Town.
Baykurt, B., 2011, ‘Redefining citizenship and civic engagement: political values 
embodied in FixMyStreet.com.’, pp. 1–18, presented at the Selected Papers of 
Internet Research (SPIR), Seattle, WA.
Coldwell-Neilson, J., 2017, ‘Assumed digital literacy knowledge by Australian 
universities: Are students informed?’, in Proceedings of the Nineteenth 
Australasian Computing Education Conference , presented at the Australasian 
Computing Education Conference, ACM, Geelong, Australia, 31 January to 3 
February 2017, pp. 75–80.
Conger, S., 2015, ‘Knowledge management for information and communication 
technologies for development programs in South Africa’, Information Technology 
for Development  21, 113–134. https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2014.899960
Creswell, J.W., 2014, A concise introduction to mixed methods research , 1st edn., Sage, 
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Daskal, E., 2018, ‘Let’s be careful out there…: How digital rights advocates educate 
citizens in the digital age’, Information, Communication & Society  21, 241–256. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1271903
Dodson, L., Sterling, S. & Bennett, J., 2012, ‘Considering failure: Eight years of ITID 
research’, Information Technologies and International Development  9, 19–34. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2160673.2160681
Eshet-Alkalai, Y ., 2004, ‘Digital literacy: A conceptual framework for survival skills 
in the digital era’, Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia  13, 
93–106.Evans, A.M. & Gomes, R.G., 2017, ‘The role of digital literacy in citizens’ adoption of 
digital public services: The Portuguese case’, in Proceedings of the 17th European 
conference on digital government, presented at the 17th European Conference on 
Digital Government, Academic Conferences and Publishing International Limited, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 12–13 June, 2017, pp. 71–77.
Feilzer, M.Y ., 2010, ‘Doing mixed methods research pragmatically: Implications for the 
rediscovery of pragmatism as a research paradigm’, Journal of Mixed Methods 
Research  4, 6–16. https://doi.org/10.1177/1558689809349691
Gaventa, J. & Barrett, G., 2012, ‘Mapping the outcomes of citizen engagement’, World 
Development  40, 2399–2410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev. 2012.05.014
Gigler, B., Bailur, S. & Anand, N., 2014, ‘The loch ness model: Can ICTs bridge the 
“Accountability Gap”?’, in B. Gigler & S. Bailur (eds.), Closing the feedback loop: 
Can technology bridge the accountability gap? , pp. 211–278, The World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
Gigler, B.-S. & Bailur, S. (eds.), 2014, Closing the feedback loop: Can Technology bridge the 
accountability gap? Directions in development , The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Goldkuhl, G., 2012, ‘Pragmatism vs interpretivism in qualitative information systems 
research’, European Journal of Information Systems  21, 135–146. https://doi.
org/10.1057/ejis.2011.54
Haikin, M., Bailur, S., Berdou, E., Dudding, J., Lopes, C.A. & Belcher, M., 2016, 
Evaluating digital citizen engagement: A practical guide , The World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
Henninger, M., 2017, ‘Government information: Literacies, behaviours and practices’, 
Government Information Quarterly  34, 8–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2016. 
12.003
Huerta, E. & Sandoval-Almazan, R., 2007, ‘Digital literacy: Problems faced by 
telecenter users in Mexico’, Information Technology for Development  13, 217–
232. https://doi.org/10.1002/itdj.20071
Ika, L. & Hodgson, D., 2014, ‘Learning from international development projects: 
Blending critical project studies and critical development studies’, International 
Journal of Project Management  32, 1182–1196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijproman.2014.01.004
Leahy, D. & Dolan, D., 2009, ‘Digital literacy – Is it necessary for inclusion’, in A. 
Holzinger & K. Miesenberger (eds.), HCI and usability for e-inclusion , Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 149–158, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Mansell, R., 2011, ‘Power and interests in information and communication and 
development: Exogenous and endogenous discourses in contention’, Journal of 
International Development  26, 109–127. https://doi.org/10.1002/jid.1805
MobiSAM Website, 2018, Active service delivery issues , MobiSAM, viewed 05 June 
2018, from https://mobisam.net/
Morgan, D.L., 2014, ‘Pragmatism as a paradigm for social research’, Qualitative Inquiry  
20, 1045–1053. https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800413513733
Nnadozie, R.C., 2013, ‘Access to basic services in post-apartheid South Africa: What 
has changed? Measuring on a relative basis’, The African Statistical Journal  16, 
81–103.
Orlikowski, W.J., 2002, ‘Knowing in practice: Enacting a collective capability in 
distributed organising’, Organisation Science  13, 249–273. https://doi.
org/10.1287/orsc.13.3.249.2776
Pade-Khene, C. & Lannon, J., 2017, ‘Learning to be sustainable in ICT for development: 
A citizen engagement initiative in South Africa’, presented at the 14th International 
Conference on Social Implications of Computers in Developing Countries (IFIP 9.4 
WG), Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 22–24 May 2017.
Pade-Khene, C., Thinyane, H. & Machiri, M., 2017, ‘Building foundations before 
technology: An operation model for digital citizen engagement in resource 
constrained contexts’, presented at the 17th European Conference on Digital 
Government, Lisbon, Portugal, 15–16 June.
Peixoto, T. & Fox, J., 2016, When does ICT-enabled citizen voice lead to government 
responsiveness? , World Bank, Washington, DC.
Saunders, M.N.K., Lewis, P ., Thornhill, A. & Wang, C.L., 2009, ‘Analysing quantitative 
data’, in M.N. Saunders, P . Lewis & A. Thornhill (eds.), Research methods for 
business students , pp. 414–479, Prentice Hall, UK.
Spada, P ., Mellon, J., Peixoto, T. & Sjoberg, F.M., 2015, Effects of the Internet on 
participation: Study of a public forum referendum in Brazil , World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
Spender, J.C., 2008, ‘Organisational learning and knowledge management: Whence 
and whither?’, Management Learning  39, 159–176. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1350507607087582
Szulanski, G., 1996, ‘Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best 
practice within the firm’, Strategic Management Journal  17, 27–43. https://doi.
org/10.1002/smj.4250171105
Tissington, K., Dettmann, M., Langford, M., Dugard, J. & Content, S., 2008, Water 
services fault lines: An assessment of South Africa’s water and sanitation provision 
across 15 municipalities , Center for Applied Legal Studies, University of 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
Toyama, K., 2011, ‘Technology as an amplifier in international development’, 
presented at the Proceedings of the iConference, pp. 75–82, ACM, Seattle, WA, 
8–11 February.
Toyama, K., 2015, Geek Heresy , Public Affairs, New York.
Yeh, Y ., Lai, S. & Ho, C., 2006, ‘Knowledge management enablers: A case study’, 
Industrial Management & Data Systems  106, 793–810. https://doi.
org/10.1108/02635570610671489
Yin, R.K., 2009, Case study research: Design and methods , Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.