ENGAGING  
YOUTH IN 
AGRICULTURE 
through Information and 
Communication TechnologiesiiABBREVIATIONS
AI Artificial Intelligence
ICT Information and Communication Technology
IPM Integrated Pest Management
GFSS U.S. Government Global Food Security Strategy
GSMAThe GSM Association (commonly referred to as 'the GSMA' or 
Global System for Mobile Communications, originally Groupe Spécial 
Mobile) is an originally-European trade body that represents the 
interests of mobile network operators worldwide
GDP Gross Domestic Product
NGO Non-governmental organization
SMSShort Message Service; a text messaging service component of most 
telephone, Internet, and mobile-device systems ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This document was written by Nikki Brand and Ellen Galdava. Critical review input and comments were provided 
by Nicole Bridge (USAID), Chad Blevins (USAID), Conor Farrell (FHI 360), Christina Blumel (FHI 360), and 
Peter M. Hirst (USAID). Information and input were also provided by Alloysius Attah (Farmerline), Mami Araba 
Kwenua Amuah (Farmerline), Georgette Bempong (Farmerline), Sibjan Chaulagain (ICT for Agri), Patricia Gichinga 
(M-Shamba), Krista Jacobs (USAID), Andrew Kovarik (Winrock International), Dace Mahanay (Technoserve), 
Michael McCabe (USAID), Karis McGill (RTI), Trent McKnight (AgriCorps), Denis Mujibi  (Usomi Agriculture), 
Melissa Persaud (VOTO Mobile), Alexandria Schmall (USAID), Miles Sedgewick  (Rana Labs), Rachel Sibande 
(Digital Impact Alliance), and Anand Varghese (DAI).1Globally, the average age of farmers is 60 years old, 
and young people are increasingly pursuing non-
agricultural careers rather than following in the 
footsteps of their parents and grandparents (World 
Farmers’ Organization, 2017). Worldwide, populations 
are becoming younger, particularly in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, where 10 of the youngest countries in the 
world are located (Hutt, 2016). Y outhful populations 
offer a great opportunity for many countries as the 
entrepreneurial and innovative energy of young people 
can help revitalize and enhance local economies. This 
is particularly true in the agricultural sector, where 
new technologies and innovative farming practices 
have the potential to enhance the sector’s productivity 
and effectiveness. However, young people do not 
automatically gravitate to farming. T o see agriculture 
as a profitable and exciting career path, young people 
need education, technical training, and resources (such 
as land and finance). 
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) 
are already bringing new vibrancy and potential to 
agricultural practices around the world. Y oung people are more ready and eager to master these new 
technologies and apply them to agriculture to increase 
productivity and solve challenges. At the same time, 
these technologies can help demonstrate to youth 
that agriculture can be a viable and profitable business 
opportunity, increasing the desirability of agriculture-
related career paths. 
This case study explores the nexus of youth, 
technology, and agriculture, highlighting insights from 
a meta-analysis of efforts around the world — and 
particularly in U.S. Government Global Food Security 
Strategy (GFSS) countries — to engage youth in 
agriculture through ICTs. It begins with an analysis 
of the challenges hindering youth involvement in 
agriculture. These include:
• Family and community pressures
• Lack of perceived profitability
• Access to land
• Access to finance
• Access to education, technical training,  
and resourcesDigital Development for Feed the Future — a collaboration between USAID’s Global Development Lab and Bureau for 
Food Security — is focused on integrating a suite of coordinated digital tools and technologies into Feed the Future activities 
to accelerate agriculture-led economic growth and improved nutrition. Feed the Future is the U.S. Government’s global 
hunger and food security initiative.
This case study is part of a series highlighting the integration of digital technologies into agricultural programs. Over the past 
10 years, and particularly over the past five, the use of mobile phones and Internet-based, digital tools in farming activities 
has risen dramatically. This is largely due to the widespread adoption of mobile phones in developing and emerging markets, 
coupled with the spread of 3G and 4G connectivity. What has emerged is a broad set of digitally based applications that 
have driven greater financial inclusion, more precision in agriculture, better data collection and analysis, and more effective 
information dissemination. Agricultural organizations and programs are increasingly embracing these tools to advance their 
goals. Each of the first six case studies highlights specific organizations and their approaches to adoption of digital tools, 
including ways that these tools affect organizational culture, operations and programming. This case study takes a slightly 
different approach, highlighting insights from a meta-analysis of efforts to engage youth in agriculture via information and 
communication technologies (ICTs).
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2The case study continues with an analysis of potential 
opportunities to improve engagement with youth in 
agriculture, including:
• Shifting the perception of farming within rural 
families and communities
• Exposing youth to agriculture early on,  
incorporating all aspects of the value chain  
(rather than just farming)
• Increasing the profitability and productivity of 
farming, and
• Introducing agriculture problems to youth to  
resolve themSeveral examples are included to illustrate how 
organizations and projects within GFSS countries 
across Latin America, Africa, and Asia use ICTs to 
engage youth in rural communities and inspire them 
to consider agriculture and related careers. Examples 
discussed in depth include Agrijoven and Rana Labs 
(Guatemala), CocoaLink (Ghana), and ICT for  
Agri (Nepal). 
The case study concludes with recommendations 
for USAID staff, implementing partners, and other 
organizations that wish to better engage youth in their 
agricultural programming through ICTs. 
Morgana Wingard3BACKGROUND 
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) including mobile phones and Internet-based digital tools are bringing 
new vibrancy and potential to agricultural practices worldwide. These tools and approaches can help address a number of 
challenges to the future of our food supply, including limited arable land, increased unpredictability of weather patterns, 
and food losses (both on- and off-farm). However, leveraging these tools to their fullest potential requires a new set of skills 
and technical expertise. Young people are often more ready and eager to master these new technologies and apply them to 
agriculture to increase productivity and solve challenges (World Farmers’ Organization, 2017). At the same time, these 
technologies can help demonstrate to youth how agriculture can be a viable and profitable business opportunity, increasing 
the desirably of agriculture-related career paths, in lieu of alternatives youth might otherwise be seeking.
Right now, youth are the largest generation in human 
history, with half of the world’s population younger 
than age 30, and 1.7 billion people aged 10–24 (USAID, 
2012). Nearly 90 percent of the world’s youth live 
in less developed countries, where two-thirds of the 
population lives in small farm households, working on 
land plots smaller than 2 hectares (UNFPA, 2014a; 
Rapsomanikis, 2015).
However, as youth seek out what they believe to 
be profitable and business-focused careers, they are 
increasingly turning away from agriculture. At the same 
time, the average age of farmers is increasing. T oday, the 
average age of farmers is about 60 years old (World 
Farmers’ Organization, 2017). These two phenomena 
combined both limit the sustainability potential of 
agriculture in less developed countries and can prevent 
the diffusion of innovative technologies and practices 
into the agricultural system. The youth bulge is most apparent in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, where 10 of the youngest countries in the  
world are located, and where this trend is expected  
to accelerate in the coming years decades  
(Hutt, 2016) (Figure 1). Y outhful populations can be 
advantageous, especially in emerging economies. The 
World Bank estimates that this demographic shift in 
Africa is expected to generate 11–15 percent GDP 
growth between 2011 and 2030 (Hutt, 2016). Y et 
this growth is contingent on countries with youthful 
demographics providing adequate education, training, 
and employment to its young citizens. Failing to do so 
could be risky, with a “lack of meaningful work among 
young people playing into frustration that has in some 
instances contributed to social unrest or unmanaged 
migration” (UNFPA, 2014a).
 4
Figure 1: Young in the World: Changing Proportions in 1980, 2015, and 2050
Source: United Nations, via WEF5Source: United Nations, via WEFMETA-ANALYSIS 
CHALLENGES HINDERING YOUTH 
INVOLVEMENT IN AGRICULTURE
Globally, several challenges contribute to a shift in the 
ambitions of rural youth from agricultural to non-
agricultural careers. Some of them are real, including 
tangible constraints in access to resources, such as 
land, finance, and training that prevent youth from 
pursuing profitable careers in agriculture. Others are 
perceived challenges, having more to do with the way 
young people think about careers in agriculture. Y oung 
people’s perceptions of agriculture are also influenced 
by the views and opinions of adults around them, 
including parents, relatives, and community members. 
Some of the most pervasive challenges hindering youth 
involvement in agriculture follow:
1. Family and community pressures:  In many rural 
agricultural communities, parents encourage their 
children to seek out alternate career paths that 
will take them away from the difficult, subsistence-
based lifestyle of working on the family farm. This 
leads to a perception of agriculture as a “backup 
plan” for youth, or something that they will engage 
in only until they find their own, alternative,  
career path. 
2. Perceived lack of profitability:  Y outh do not believe 
farming is a profitable career path. The seasonality 
of planting and harvesting adds to this perception, 
given that profits from farming can come many 
weeks or months after large financial investments 
in inputs, machinery, or labor at the beginning of 
the season.  
1 GFSS target countries are Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Mali, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, and Uganda.3. Access to land : In many U.S. Government Global 
Food Security Strategy (GFSS) countries,1 
particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, land is a 
communal resource and must be passed down 
within a family, rented, or purchased. Though youth 
have opportunities to work on their parent’s land, 
and family land is often subdivided among the 
children, youth are limited in their ability to access 
new or additional land to begin or grow their  
own farms. 
4. Access to finance:  Financial resources are 
required for both on- and off-farm pursuits. This 
is a challenge for all demographic groups, but 
particularly so for youth who often lack collateral 
or other requirements for accessing credit from 
a bank. Y outh access to finance is thus typically 
limited to family or community resources. Financial 
literacy also plays a role, as young people may not 
understand the importance of saving and financial 
planning or the steps required to access formal 
or informal financial services, particularly if the 
financial literacy of their parents or caregivers is 
also limited. 
5. Access to training, education, and information : 
Agricultural knowledge is often passed down 
generationally and within communities, but youth 
particularly demand new knowledge, access to 
improved technologies, and an understanding of 
how to apply advanced techniques or grow new 
crops. Without a structured system to provide 
youth with this knowledge, many seek out other 
career paths. 6OPPORTUNITIES TO BETTER ENGAGE 
YOUTH IN AGRICULTURE
Each of these challenges is complex and requires 
multifaceted solutions to help youth see the value and 
potential of pursuing a career in agriculture. Examples 
of ways to promote youth engagement in agriculture 
include the following: 
1. Shift the perception of farming within  
rural families and communities:  ICTs, such 
as mobile phones and the Internet, and 
communications platforms like television and radio 
can be used to highlight examples of successful 
youth agripreneurs and agriculturalists to shift 
perceptions of agriculture in rural areas. The 
Mediae Company  in Kenya is known for producing 
“edutainment” shows to accomplish this goal. 
Examples include Shamba Shape-Up , a makeover-
style reality TV show with an audience of 10 million 
that aims to educate smallholder farmers about 
good agricultural practices; Makutano Junction ; and the USAID-funded Don’t Lose the Plot , which  
was aired to 3.4 million young viewers in Kenya, 
Tanzania, and Uganda in 2017, incorporating an 
element of interactivity with SMS and chatrooms. 
2. Expose youth to agriculture early on, incorporating 
all aspects of the value chain (rather than just 
farming ): Learning about agriculture can start at 
a young age, and partnerships with schools and 
universities offer opportunities to promote such 
learning. For example, the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture’s 4-H program has taken root through 
independent, country-led affiliate programs in 15 
countries in Africa. The 4-H Enterprise Gardens 
program, started in Ghana in 2000, now reaches 
more than 320,000 youth (ages 6–24) across the 
continent (National 4-H Council, 2016). Through 
the 4-H Enterprise Gardens, youth in Africa are 
exposed to agriculture from a young age. They 
help plan, plant, and manage a food-producing 
garden, either in or outside of school, learning 
Cocoalink7Table 1: Summary of Digital Agriculture InterventionsPROGAM PROFILE
DON’T LOSE THE PLOT (EAST AFRICA)
Funded by Feed the Future, Africa Lead, and Mercy Corps AgriFin Accelerate (AFA), Don’t Lose the Plot is a TV show 
designed and produced by Mediae Company in 2017 as part of a strategy to engage young people in farming as a 
business and to leverage digital tools and services. The show, which aired in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, showed four 
young farmers (two men and two women) competing to win an award of $10,000 for having the most profitable and 
sustainable farm on a one-acre plot.
The goal of the reality show was to appeal directly to young people and “cultivate the next breed of farmers” through 
the use of digital tools. The episodes covered such topics as soil testing, irrigation, and fertilizers; budgeting; obtaining 
a loan; choosing crops and livestock; managing the farm. The farmers received guidance from agriculture experts 
provided by AFA on financial planning, planting strategies, agricultural inputs, and marketing. Digital tools that were 
integrated into the show, such as a web-based budget planning tool called Budget Mkononi, were posted on Mediae’s 
web and social media platforms so viewers could also access them. Budget Mkononi enables the farmer to select the 
variables needed to start their own agri business and to provide real-time budget information. Users can save budgets 
for later reference and share them with lenders and financial institutions. 
AFA and Mediae used several interactive communication platforms to allow viewers to engage with the show 
participants, agriculture experts, and producers. For example, viewers could submit requests for additional information 
on farm management or agricultural practices through iShamba, an interactive SMS-based farming information service 
that responds to questions and requests for information, has tips from the shows, and presents weather alerts, market 
price information, and special offers. Viewers could also request resources and advice using Facebook and Twitter. 
After 13 episodes, AFA and Mediae conducted an initial assessment of the impact and found out that 3.4 million 
viewers watched the TV shows in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. More than 60 percent of viewers were aged  
18–34, with an equal representation of male and female farmers (Madara, Makau & Gwinner, 2017). However,  
54 percent of the website users, 66 percent of the Facebook audience, and 74 percent of the Twitter account 
followers were young male farmers, revealing a gender gap in the use of digital tools to learn more about farming 
(Madara, Makau & Gwinner, 2017). The initial evaluation also reviewed which type of digital tools was used most by 
viewers. The findings revealed that 62 percent of the viewers accessed the website by mobile phone, compared to 
35 percent by computer and 3 percent by tablet (Madara, Makau & Gwinner, 2017). The evaluation also revealed that 
Budget Mkononi was the most popular page on the show’s website with 10,479 budgets created as of May 2018 
(Madara, Makau & Gwinner, 2017). 
The Don’t Lose the Plot project confirmed that competition is one of the ways to attract youth in agriculture. For 
example, all four participants made an average return 2.5 times their investment (Madara, Makau & Gwinner, 2017). 
Additionally, popularity of the budgeting tool confirmed that youth are open to and seeking ways to increase their 
financial literacy. Through funding from Feed the Future, Mediae conducted an in-depth evaluation of the project and 
identified that the TV episodes improved knowledge of farming and agribusiness among high-intensity youth viewers 
who were already engaged in farming (Kantar Public East Africa, 2018). The findings also revealed that 77 percent of 
female high-intensity viewers in Tanzania strongly agreed that farming is “cool” compared with 50 percent of female 
non-viewers (Kantar Public East Africa, 2018). T o learn more about the findings of the in-depth evaluation of the 
project, read the report.  8both agricultural and entrepreneurial skills in 
the process. Through AgriCorp s, for instance, 
American agriculture volunteers are embedded 
in schools in developing countries to provide 
experiential agricultural education through 
classroom instruction and working in an on-school 
farm. Finally, in seeking to promote its CocoaLink 
application in Ghana, ag-tech company Farmerline 
incorporated Farm Field Days in partnership with 
local universities, bringing youth directly to farms 
for in-person engagement (see case study on  
page 16). 
3. Increase profitability and productivity of farming:  
ICTs can play an important role in modernizing 
farming practices, incorporating elements of 
precision agriculture, and introducing new, 
innovative techniques to speed up and increase 
production. These technologies are often created 
and managed by tech-savvy youth. Y oung farmers 
are also generally early adopters or serve in 
formal or informal roles to support less tech-savvy 
farmers in using these technologies. Hello Tractor , 
a Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation and 
Development Innovations Ventures grantee in 
Nigeria, is one such an example. Hello Tractor’s 
platform connects tractor owners to farmers via 
a digital application, increasing on-farm efficiency 
through machinery and mechanization.  
The service employs a team of booking agents 
— young, tech-savvy men and women living in or 
near rural villages — to help facilitate access to 
their platform, even for those who may not have 
access to or comfort in using a mobile phone or 
the booking platform (Foote, 2018). Not only does 
this model create employment for youth, it also 
leverages their unique skill sets to create impact in 
the broader community. 4. Engage youth in solving agriculture problems: 
Y outh bring an innovative, tech-savvy perspective 
to solving some of the most difficult problems 
in agriculture, and they are eager to apply 
their technology skills to create change in their 
communities. Examples include USAID-funded 
prizes, such as the Data Driven Farming Prize  in 
Nepal (for more on one of the winners, see the 
Krishi Guru case study on page 21) and the Fall 
Armyworm Tech Prize  in Africa. Hackathons and 
startup competitions are another way to engage 
youth, such as the Hack4Farming  event series 
held in Ghana (2015), Kenya (2016), and India 
(2017) and tech accelerator Phandeeyar’s Startup 
Challenge  in Myanmar, which incorporated a Tech 
for Farm track in both 2017 and 2018. 
STAKEHOLDER ROLES
The government, private sector, and NGO/donor 
communities each have critical roles to play in 
addressing these challenges, both individually and 
through partnerships and collaborations.
The role of the non-government organization 
(NGO)/donor community , including USAID and 
its implementing partners, is the primary focus of this 
case study. Above all, for donors and implementing 
partners, the first step to better engaging youth in 
agriculture through ICTs will be to first develop a 
baseline understanding of how we are already doing 
this, determine what is working well, and what can 
be improved. Once there is a good understanding of 
what is already happening on the ground in the youth 
agriculture space, the next step will be to evaluate at 
which points technology can be integrated to help 
improve those efforts and create greater impact for 
youth, in a particular country or region. More detailed 
recommendations for the NGO/donor community are 
discussed in the final section of this document. 9The private sector  can support youth by providing 
them with incentives to engage in agriculture, and 
more specifically, agribusiness — for example, through 
internships, apprenticeships, and training programs 
to prepare youth to lead and manage agribusinesses. 
Private-sector companies are typically the main actors 
to which farmers turn to access seed, fertilizer, and 
pesticides, as well as machinery and equipment such 
as tractors. Working for private-sector companies 
may be more appealing to youth who are looking for 
agricultural opportunities off the farm; however, such 
opportunities are not always available.
In the financial sector, there is a $430–$440 billion 
shortfall in serving the global demand for smallholder 
finance (Carroll et al., 2012). Y outh feel this shortfall 
more acutely than other demographic groups, and 
without appropriate financial resources, any agricultural 
pursuits are risky and may be prohibitive. Although 
traditional banks can play a role in meeting this 
shortfall, there is also an important role for digital 
financial services to fill in where formal financial 
services have failed. USAID’s Guide to the Use of 
Digital Financial Services  provides a framework for 
organizations to determine if and how digital financial 
services can help to address various roadblocks for 
farmers as they manage their farms as businesses. 
Mobile phones are a precondition for the use of digital 
financial services; in countries with high mobile phone 
penetration, youth are generally the most likely to own 
a phone. A 2015 survey reported that across seven 
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa — including GFSS 
countries Nigeria, Uganda, and Ghana — youth aged 
18–34 were far more likely to own a smartphone than 
were their older counterparts (Pew Research Center, 
2015). Though many digital financial services can be operated with only a basic mobile phone, access to 
a smartphone and the Internet greatly enhances the 
opportunity to share digitally enabled information  
and services. 
Governments also have an important role to play 
in engaging youth in agriculture. Every GFSS country 
except Mali has a National Y outh Policy (Y outh Policy 
Labs, 2018). The majority of these policies, however, 
were drafted in the early 2000s. Although some were 
updated since then, none have been updated within 
the past five years and consequently fail to account 
for the use of ICTs in engaging youth in agriculture. 
Governments can ensure that youth policies are  
up-to-date and reflective of the opportunities 
to leverage technology. In addition, they have an 
opportunity to focus their agricultural investments in 
ways that support the needs of youth, such asproviding 
training and capacity building designed to help them 
develop the new skills they will need to excel in 
agricultural careers. 10GENDER, ICT, AND AGRICULTURE
On average, women make up 43 percent of the agriculture labor in developing countries, ranging from 20 
percent in Latin America to 50 percent in East and Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (FAO, 2011). 
Similar to other markets, women and girls in agriculture encounter challenges related to land access, 
productive resources, managing income from land, education, financial services, and information (FAO, 
2018). FAO claims that “the empowerment of women could raise farm productivity by 20–30 percent, 
increase national agricultural outputs by 2.5–4.0 percent and, ultimately, lift 100 to 150 million people out 
of hunger” (FAO, 2011). 
ICTs can contribute to reducing the gender gap in agriculture and empowering women and girls to 
increase sustainable output, manage farm and agribusiness efficiently, and improve gender equality 
throughout the agriculture value chain. However, the digital, rural, and gender divide — also called the 
“triple divide”—  that women face in agriculture, as in other markets (FAO 2018), due largely to cultural 
and societal norms and perceptions, creates challenges in accessing and using ICT tools. Based on the 
latest data from the GSMA2, women are 10 percent less likely to own a mobile phone, and across low- 
and middle-income countries, 390 million women are completely unconnected (GSMA, 2018). Thus, many 
women around the globe remain unable to benefit from the use of ICT in agriculture. Unfortunately, there 
is no disaggregated data on girl’s usage of ICT tools and participation in the agriculture value chain.
Considering the triple divide and the role of women in agriculture, projects such as Apprenticeship in 
Extension, Entrepreneurism, and Rural Innovation (AVENIR) are important to ensure that women and 
girls have opportunities to improve their access to resources, information, and knowledge and/or farm 
inputs, which will in turn increase their productivity in the agriculture and economic sector. In Guinea, 
the AVENIR project, developed through a partnership of USAID’s Strengthening Market-Led Agriculture 
Research, Technology, and Education (SMARTE) and Feed the Future Strengthening Agriculture Value 
Chains and Y outh (SAVY), aims to target at least 40 percent of young women in their program. The 
goal of the AVENIR project is to train young people aged 18–35 in theoretical and practical sides of 
entrepreneurship and agribusiness. The program consists of one month of theoretical training on market 
analysis, cost-benefit analysis, and other topics and nine-month apprenticeships with host institutions that 
includes ag-input suppliers, veterinary cabinets, producer organizations, and microfinance institutions in 
the Faranah, Kindia, and Mamou regions of Guinea (Loken, 2017). In 2017 and 2018, 42 young Guinean 
women completed the AVENIR training (Kovarik, 2018). T o ensure sustainability and assist the graduates 
in implementing their business plans, the AVENIR project offers competitive small grants to alumni. By 
September 2018, two out of eight small grant recipients were young, female farmers. T o learn more, please 
visit the AVENIR project website  (Kovarik, 2018).
1 
2   The GSM Association (commonly referred to as ‘the GSMA’ or Global System for Mobile Communications, originally Groupe Spécial Mobile) is an originally-
European trade body that represents the interests of mobile network operators worldwide.11EVIDENCE AND EXAMPLES
The following section describes a series of examples 
of organizations and projects within GFSS countries 
across Latin America, Africa, and Asia that use ICTs 
to engage youth in rural communities and inspire 
them to consider agriculture-based careers. Examples 
generally fall under two categories: 1) organizations 
that use ICTs to engage youth, but may or may not 
be founded and managed by youth themselves; and 2) 
organizations that are founded and managed by youth 
and incorporate ICTs into their operations. Agrijoven 
(Guatemala) is an example of the first type; Krishi 
Guru (Nepal) is an example of the second type; and 
Cocoalink (Ghana) falls under both categories. 
REGION: LATIN AMERICA
Agrijoven and Rana Labs (Guatemala)
Country Context
In Guatemala, 54 percent of the population lives in 
poverty and 13 percent in extreme poverty.  
The statistics are worse in the Western Highlands of 
the country, where the majority of the population is indigenous and agriculture employs over 70 percent of 
the population (USAID, 2016). Here, 76 percent live in 
poverty and 27 percent in extreme poverty  
(USAID, 2017). 
Over half of Guatemala’s population is under 19, and 
70 percent are under 30 — the highest youth ratio 
in Central America (USAID, 2016). Guatemalan youth 
living in rural areas tend to hold unstable jobs in the 
informal rural economy that pay less than half of the 
minimum national wage, driving many to migrate to 
cities or abroad in search of better opportunities 
(Food and Agriculture Organization [FAO], 2018). 
Though many Guatemalan youths who do not migrate 
continue to work on their family farms, agriculture is 
not perceived as a profitable or esteemed profession.
In terms of its digital ecosystem, Guatemala is keeping 
pace with the region overall and has a strong platform 
for digital growth (Table 1). A strong (and growing) 
digital ecosystem is an important enabler for digitally 
based projects to thrive.  
TABLE 1  
GUATEMALA’S DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM
Market 
Penetration
(unique 
subscribersSmartphone 
AdoptionMobile 
Internet3G Network 
CoverageAnnual Growth 
Rate (unique 
subscribers)
Guatemala 50% 59% 30% 95% 4%
Central America 61% 57% 46% 93% 4%
Source: GSMA Intelligence, 201812Description of Initiative
The Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation 
Agrijoven project is implemented in the Western 
Highlands of Guatemala by Mercy Corps, in 
collaboration with digital media agency Rana Labs and 
local agri-exporter Fair Fruit. 
Agrijoven engages over 1,000 youths (ages 14–29) 
through formal discussions on social and agronomic 
topics, with the ultimate goal of increasing income-
generating capacity through savings and credit and the 
use of agricultural technologies to improve on-farm 
productivity (Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation, 
2017). For example, Agrijoven already organized 
64 savings and loan groups, which established 40 
demonstration plots. These groups cumulatively saved 
$125,431 and disbursed 1,030 loans worth $101,512. 
T o further increase impact, Agrijoven sought out Rana 
Labs to better engage the youth and increase their 
excitement about agriculture. 
Leveraging low-cost technologies and equipment — 
the smartphones that over half of the youth already 
possessed, along with a few low-cost accessories 
— Rana Labs began holding workshops with groups 
of young farmers, training them to create their own 
professional-quality videos on good agricultural 
practices. The technical content of the videos has 
included the use of irrigation systems, integrated pest 
management (IPM), seed storage, food safety, and more. 
Rana Labs ultimately seeks to build youth’s skills that 
they can leverage for future business opportunities.  
At the same time, youth are creating videos that can 
be taken back to their communities as a teaching tool 
to improve crop quality and agricultural production, or 
sold to and used by others, such as community shops 
or agribusinesses. Key Successes 
Agrijoven has engaged 1,500 youths overall, with 
over 300 youth trained in video production through 
the partnership with Rana Labs, in each of the five 
Feed the Future priority municipalities of the Western 
Highlands of Guatemala (Feed the Future Partnering 
for Innovation, 2017). About 80 percent of participants 
are youth aged 14–25 years; the remaining 20 percent 
are adults 26–30 years of age. 
Not only do participants learn video production skills 
and create high-quality videos that enable them to 
share agricultural information with others in their 
communities, but the process of creating the videos 
also facilitates agricultural learning for the youth.  
T o create a professional-quality video that highlights 
information in a compelling way, the youth must  
first master the complex and highly technical 
information themselves.
Participants of the workshop have already been 
contacted by NGOs and hired to create agricultural 
videos for them, rather than hiring a professional 
video production company. Rana Labs hopes that 
in the future, Guatemalan agribusinesses will also 
see the value of these youth and their technical skill 
sets, choosing to hire them, instead of professional 
companies, to create marketing and promotional 
videos at a lower cost and in the appropriate local 
language. There also may be opportunities for these 
young people to take their skills to other sectors, such 
as tourism. 
This approach of gaining real-world knowledge of 
how technology can improve farming in Guatemalan 
communities pairs well with young participants’ desire 
to feel connected to the rest of the world through 
digital technologies and media. T o that end, Agrijoven 
created a Facebook page that provides current and 
past participants with updates, photos, videos, and a 
forum to stay engaged with their peers. 13Lessons Learned and Scalability
Rana Labs is expanding its operations in Guatemala  
and continues to think about ways to enhance the 
impact of the Arijoven project. One strategy will be 
improving its impact measurement processes by finding 
ways to better quantify the reach of the agricultural 
videos created in the workshops. Currently, at the 
end of each workshop, participants take advantage of 
low-cost Internet access to share the video files with 
one another. Y outh in Guatemala seek to minimize their 
own use of expensive data, so beyond the workshop, 
the videos are mostly shared with others in person. 
Rana Labs is interested in better understanding of how, 
with whom, and with how many people the videos 
are shared after the workshops. At the same time, 
they would like to create additional opportunities for 
the videos to be shared with the broader agricultural 
communities in Guatemala. 
Rana Labs would also like to complement the video 
production workshops with training on entrepreneurial skills for the youth, in areas such as how to market 
themselves and the videos and how to engage with 
companies and community partners. This will allow 
participants to take what they learn in the workshops a 
step further, ideally facilitating additional opportunities 
for them to use their new skills to generate income for 
themselves and their families.
In terms of scalability, Rana Labs suggests that their 
model has worked well in Guatemala because of 
reasonably high smartphone adoption and strong 
digital literacy among young populations. In the future, 
Rana Labs would like to test their model in a different 
context, potentially in a country with higher levels of 
poverty, lower levels of smartphone adoption, or less 
access to electricity. Specifically, they are exploring 
whether the same model could be applied in a  
less-connected context, for example, by bringing in 
solar-powered chargers to help with charging phones 
or exploring other low-cost technologies where 
smartphone adoption is lower. 
Debora Chacón, Rana Labs14REGION: AFRICA
CocoaLink (Ghana)
Country Context
Sixty-eight percent of Ghana’s population live in rural 
areas, with agriculture contributing 54 percent of the 
GDP and accounting for 40 percent of export earnings. 
Agriculture provides 90 percent of the country’s food 
needs — all through farms with an average size of less 
than 1.6 hectares (FAO Organization, 2018). Forty 
percent of Ghana’s population works in the agricultural 
sector, though this number has declined in the past 
five years, from 45 percent in 2013, and Ghana’s food 
imports are on the rise (World Bank, 2017). 
Ghana is like many other countries in Sub-Saharan 
Africa and globally experiencing an aging farmer 
population and rapidly growing youth population. The 
average age of farmers in Ghana is 55 years, with life 
expectancy averaging between 55 and 60 years (Ghana 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture, 2011). At the same 
time, 30 percent of Ghana’s population is aged 10–24 
years. Many youth are migrating from rural to urban 
areas to seek employment, rather than working in 
agriculture (UNFPA, 2014b). However, according to a 2015 Labour Force Report, youth unemployment 
remains high: 31 percent of young females and 25 
percent of young males do not have gainful work 
(Ghana Statistical Service, 2015). 
In terms of Ghana’s digital ecosystem, the country 
is above the regional average in terms of market 
penetration, mobile internet, and 3G network coverage, 
with a market penetration rate of above 50 percent 
and nearly one third of the population having access 
to mobile internet. This is the second highest Internet 
access rate in West Africa (Farmerline, 2018).
Description of Initiative
Farmerline was established in 2013 as a social 
enterprise. It uses technology to increase information 
access for smallholder farmers, reaching over 200,000 
farmers in 11 African countries, including Ghana. 
Through support from Hershey, Farmerline developed 
CocoaLink 2.0, an informational application that targets 
cocoa farmers in Ghana, building on the success of 
Hershey’s original CocoaLink platform, which leveraged 
SMS and voice messages to exchange information with 
cocoa farmers. 
TABLE 2  
GHANA DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM
Market 
Penetration
(unique 
subscribers)Smartphone 
AdoptionMobile 
Internet3G Network 
CoverageAnnual Growth 
Rate (unique 
subscribers)
Ghana 53% 35% 31% 85% 5.5%
West Africa 48% 35% 22% 69% 5.8%
Source: GSMA Intelligence, 201815Through gamified and interactive content in a variety  
of digital media such as video, pictures, interactive 
quizzes, and chatbots, CocoaLink 2.0 aims to inspire, 
train, and incentivize the next generation of Ghanaian 
cocoa farmers.
The target audience for CocoaLink is youth aged 
18–35. Farmerline engages them through churches, 
universities, and agriculture courses, predominantly 
in the Ashanti region. One of Farmerline’s outreach 
strategies is their Farm Field Days, conducted in 
partnership with university agricultural programs. 
Farmerline takes students to the field, exposing them 
to cocoa farming and helping them learn about the 
CocoaLink application, harnessing the power of in-
person communication and mentorship. Farmerline 
has also elected university campus ambassadors to 
support marketing and feedback collection from  
young users.  2
Key Successes
Farmerline conducted a pilot of CocoaLink in 2017 
with 800 young farmers, in partnership with Hershey 
and the World Cocoa Foundation.3 The goals of the 
pilot included improving the certification efficiency and 
sustainability of cocoa supply chains and increasing 
access to information for young farmers. This effort 
ultimately contributed to increased farmer incomes 
and improved agricultural productivity for Ghana. 
Additionally, Cocoalink serves as a unique avenue for 
young people in Ghana to learn about cocoa farming 
and see firsthand how involvement in agriculture can 
be a profitable and respectable career. 
3 Hershey’s Case Study: Cocoalink a Case Study by Miller CenterLessons Learned and Scalability
Farmerline demonstrates that ICTs can be a highly 
effective tool in engaging youth, but it should not 
be the only one. Human connections are also vital, 
particularly for youth who may not have access to 
or be comfortable with digital technologies. This 
understanding led to Farmerline’s Farm Field Days, 
which provide opportunities to foster in-person 
relationships between university students and the 
organization, while sharing the idea that cocoa 
farming can be profitable and exciting. Additionally, 
Farmerline recognized a need to engage users with 
varying degrees of technology access. This recognition 
drove them to develop the Farm Assistant BOT, an 
AI-powered chatbot that allows users to interact with 
CocoaLink through Facebook Messenger. 
Source: Farmerline16PROGRAM PROFILE
YOUTHMAPPERS (GHANA)
Y outhMappers is a global initiative funded by the USAID GeoCenter.  Its goal is to create a global network 
of university students empowered to build resilient communities and define their world by creating open 
geographic data that directly addresses locally defined development challenges. In late 2015, Y outhMappers 
was founded by USAID’s Global Development Lab in conjunction with Texas Tech, George Washington, 
and West Virginia universities. The network currently consists of 120 universities in 38 countries. Apart 
from engaging youth to map their local communities, the initiative includes leadership workshops, research 
fellowships, and in-person and virtual training, while focusing on female mapper participation and chapter-
to-chapter collaboration.  Y outhMappers uses open source geospatial software tools to remotely map 
communities from satellite imagery, then head into the field to conduct surveys and capture photos. 
USAID Offices and Y outhMappers provide mini-grants to local Y outhMappers chapters to assist them with 
travel and technology costs associated with mapping. These projects focus on themes such as community 
resilience, health, hazard preparation, and food security.
In 2018, Y outhMappers engaged in their first field project directly related to agriculture. Over 10 days, 12 
Ghanaian students and a mentoring professor from the University of Cape Coast worked with experts 
from the Soybean Innovation Lab to map and capture information to better understand the dynamics of 
the soybean industry in Kumasi, Ghana – the country’s soybean hub. This project was initiated and funded 
by the Bureau for Food Security , which realized the potential of using digital tools to collect data while 
teaching students the different ways soybeans contribute to the country’s economy. After completing 
the field mapping exercise, students analyzed data and suggested ways to increase soybean production, 
storage, and processing capabilities in Kumasi. Some of their recommendations are inclusion of soy 
products in school feeding programs, improving financial assistance and access, establishment of storage 
facilities and improving the road infrastructure. This project clearly demonstrates the potential youth and 
digital tools can play in the agriculture value chain. Not only were students introduced to the soybean 
market, but they experienced it via the interactive digital tool of GIS mapping and open source KoBo 
T oolbox ( https://www.kobotoolbox.org/ )17In implementing Farm Field Days, Farmerline also 
identified the need to specifically target and encourage 
female participation, as over 80 percent of the field day 
attendees have been male. For that reason, Farmerline 
have been trying to talk to more female students when 
they attend career fairs at local universities. However, in 
Ghana, women — particularly young women — face 
additional challenges related to agricultural training, 
land and property access, and a lack of mentorship, 
resulting in an even greater need to find ways to 
provide them with support.
REGION: ASIA
ICT for Agri (Nepal)
Country Context
Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world. 
Over the past decades, Nepal has seen an overall 
shift away from the agriculture industry — from 90 
percent of the population working in agriculture in 
the 1980s to where it stands today (Paulde, 2016). T oday, agriculture accounts for 34 percent of its 
GDP and provides employment for 68 percent of 
the population. Y et limited access to improved seeds, 
agricultural technologies, and market opportunities 
have contributed to declining agricultural production 
and widespread hunger (USAID, 2018).
Like many other countries, Nepal is experiencing a 
youth bulge in its population demographics. According 
to Nepal’s National Y outh Policy, 21 percent of the 
population is 16–25 years of age, and 41 percent is 
16–40 (Kumar, 2015). More than 80 percent of the 
country’s youth are employed in the non-formal 
sector, and almost half of the youth labor force 
depends on agriculture for survival (Kumar, 2015; 
Nepal Government, n.d.). Many Nepali youth seek 
out employment abroad, particularly in the Persian 
Gulf, sending remittances home to help support their 
families and communities. Remittances make up nearly 
29 percent of the GDP (Dennison, 2017).
TABLE 3  
NEPAL’S DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM
Market 
Penetration
(unique 
subscribersSmartphone 
AdoptionMobile 
Internet3G Network 
CoverageAnnual Growth 
Rate (unique 
subscribers)
Nepal 53% 56% 29% 90% 1.2%
Southeast Asia 72% 64% 45% 93% 3.2%
Source: GSMA Intelligence, 201818PRGORAM PROFILE
AKORIAN EZYAGRIC (UGANDA)
An event organized in 2014 by Feed the Future and USAID/Uganda inspired five youth-led ICT companies 
to form Akorion Limited Liability Company. The youth-led Akorian focuses on digitizing the agriculture 
value chain and enabling smallholder farmers in Uganda and other agriculture service providers to access 
information and high-quality production and marketing services through EzyAgric (Akorion, 2016). 
EzyAgric serves as a marketplace to connect farmers, buyers, sellers, input suppliers, exporters, soil labs, 
crop insurance companies, and financial institutions in one place (Akuba, 2017). 
Considering that mobile phone ownership in Uganda is low, Akorion incorporates e-VAM (Electronic 
Village Agent Model), a service delivery model in which youth are employed as village agents and 
equipped with smartphones to deliver services and gather data from farmers (Akorion 2016). e-VAM 
enables Akorion to employ youth in agriculture and connect with smallholder farmers on a personal basis. 
Using EzyAgric, village agents capture farmers’ demography, production, inputs, and product supply data, 
and they map the cultivated land using GPS. With these data, Akorion creates digital farmer profiles 
and provides customized services and recommendations to farmers. Additionally, the aggregated data 
help identify what farmers need and, using EzyAgric, negotiate good prices from vetted suppliers of 
genuine Agro Input products (Akuba, 2017). Akorion has also trained their village agents to conduct soil 
sampling and use the data Akorion distributes to identify appropriate fertilizer for the farm, thus earning a 
commission on both the soil testing and product distribution (Anyang, 2015). Overall, Akorion’s business 
model generates up $42 in commission fees for the package of services delivered to each farmer  
(Anyang, 2015). 
After three years of implementation, Akorion has served 60,000 farmers and digitally profiled 42,000 
farmers through a network of 480 village agents, 100 farmer associations, and partner organizations 
such as Feed the Future, World Food Programme, and Savannah Commodities (Akorion, 2018). Further, 
Akorion has continued working with youth in Uganda, and since 2016, they have trained girls 13–18 years 
of age in entrepreneurship, technology, and healthy life choices (Akuba, 2017). In 2018, Akorion became 
a finalist in the Fall Armyworm (FAW) Tech Prize Challenge. The company is designing a smartphone 
application to identify, monitor, and combat FAW.19
Nepal lags behind other Southeast Asian  
countries on all metrics of the digital ecosystem  
(Table 3). However, year-on-year growth for these 
metrics is high, particularly for mobile Internet access, 
which is growing at 26 percent annually (GSMA 
Intelligence, 2018).
Description of Initiative
Sibjan Chaulagain founded ICT for Agri in 2014, 
launching an SMS and mobile application called Krishi 
Guru that provides precise and localized information 
to Nepali farmers about climate-smart crop advisories, 
input suppliers, weather forecasts, and market prices. 
Born and raised in a remote village in Nepal, where 
almost everybody works in agriculture, Chaulagain 
chose an untraditional path by studying engineering. 
After returning to his village and spending two years 
setting up solar-powered computer labs, he decided 
to apply his expertise to agriculture to help his 
community. This led him to found ICT for Agri later branded as Krishi Guru , to create a way to connect 
the agriculture information that exists elsewhere to 
his community, ultimately improving the livelihoods of 
Nepal’s smallholder farmers. 
Key Successes
ICT for Agri currently engages 117,000 farmers by 
sending information and receiving questions via SMS, 
Facebook, and the Krishi Guru application. This includes 
20,000 downloads of Krishi Guru (about 10,000 
of which are considered “active” users) and 10,000 
farmers registered on the SMS platform.
The most popular component of Krishi Guru is an on-
demand inquiry system, in which farmers can upload a 
picture of their crops and seek out expert help. Once 
a picture is updated, farming and agronomics experts 
identify the problem and recommend a solution. ICT 
for Agri also leverages the interactivity of Facebook to 
allow farmers to share information and help solve one 
another’s problems. Debora Chacón, Rana Labs20In addition to supporting a large number of Nepali 
farmers, ICT for Agri strives to provide opportunities 
for other youth in Nepal who are interested in 
learning how to apply technology to agriculture. ICT 
for Agri currently hosts five agriculture students as 
interns (selected from a competitive pool of over 
50 applicants), who help respond to inquiries on the 
platform. These interns are increasing their knowledge 
about agriculture and technology while directly 
connecting with farmers. ICT for Agri provides the 
interns with a unique platform wherein they can solve 
real-time problems that farmers are facing. 
Lessons Learned and Scalability 
ICT for Agri is thinking about other ways to leverage 
the 117,000 Nepali farmers already engaged in their 
platforms to inform even more farmers, and they are 
developing a chatbot on Facebook Messenger that will 
go live in the coming months to help with this goal. 
The chatbot will be more accessible to farmers who 
lack smartphones (prohibiting their access to the Krishi 
Guru app) and may not have a Google account, but 
who do have access to Facebook, either through a 
shared phone or a feature phone that can access the 
Internet but not run the application. ICT for Agri also 
hopes to engage more female farmers, who make up 
only an estimated 30 percent of users, despite there 
being more female farmers than male farmers in Nepal. 
As a young ag-tech entrepreneur, Chaulagain also 
spends a lot of time considering the future of 
agriculture in Nepal and the role that youth can 
play in supporting a more profitable and sustainable future. Growing up, Chaulagain recalls agriculture 
being considered a very low-profile sector and a 
difficult career path, with limited access to enabling 
technologies, especially in rural areas. 
Through ICT for Agri, however, he discovered how 
he can apply his background in engineering to solving 
some of the problems in Nepal’s agricultural sector, 
realizing that ICTs can increase the profitability of 
agriculture, making it more commercialized and 
simultaneously improving its perception — especially 
among youth. 
At the same time, Chaulagain notes that especially 
in recent years, the agricultural sector has become 
a hot topic of conversation among youth in Nepal, 
particularly those who have returned home after 
spending time working as migrant workers in Gulf 
countries such as Israel and Saudi Arabia. Here, 
recounts Chaulagain, Nepali youth have seen that 
agriculture can be very commercial and profitable — 
even in challenging environmental conditions —  
and are bringing that message back to Nepal when 
they return. 
In 2017, ICT for Agri received a $50,000 award from 
USAID’s Data Driven Farming Prize, and in 2018, 
Chaulagain was recognized as an Echoing Green 
Climate Fellow . Through the support of these networks, 
ICT for Agri hopes to grow its impact, both increasing 
its user base and improving the services that it can 
provide to farmers.21PROGRAM PROFILE
DREAM AGRITECH (PHILIPPINES)
Dream Agritech  is an agricultural consulting firm in the Philippines founded and run by a group of 
young agricultural professionals. The organization was started by a group of classmates studying different 
branches of agriculture in university, with the aim of becoming a “one-stop shop” of knowledge for clients, 
who are often landowners without a background in agriculture. The firm provides guidance on how 
landowners can operate their farms effectively even if they are relative beginners in the industry. 
The “Dream Team,” which is scattered across the country, uses mobile phones, email, Slack, and Google 
Drive to stay connected and provide real-time updates. Recently, they began using drones to get a better 
view of the fields where they are working. The team initially used images from Google Earth to get a view 
of new farms, but they found that the shots were not up-to-date, and some of the more remote areas of 
the country were not yet covered by Google Earth. This led the company to purchase a small drone that 
they use to take area photographs of a site and help with farm layout. In the future, they hope to integrate 
additional technologies such as low-cost sensors for soil testing.
While most of Dream Agritech’s team are in their mid 20s and early 30s, their farmer clients tend to be 
older, in their early to mid 50s. Most of their clients have mobile phones and can make and receive calls 
and SMS, and a handful have Facebook, but they typically do not use email or access spreadsheets. Part 
of Dream Agritech’s service is to help enhance their clients’ use of digital and mobile technologies. The 
company hopes to integrate more technology training into their model in the future. 
Dakila Olfindo, founder of Dream Agritech, did not grow up expecting to work in agriculture. While 
most of his friends’ parents encouraged them to find jobs in fields such as engineering, medicine, and law, 
his mother — who went to the same university he graduated from and worked in agricultural business 
management — encouraged him to pursue agriculture. “If there’s one thing the world can never run out 
of (demand?), it is food, so [if you work in agriculture], there will always be demand for people like you,” his 
mother said.
More recently, Oflindo recalls,  activists on Facebook and social media have started to shift the perception 
of agriculture, with a groundswell of support for the industry coming from youth who are reacting to 
news about food shortages across the Philippines and recognizing the role they can play in addressing this 
problem. Recognizing the role they can play in addressing agricultural issues, Dream Agritech is committed 
to help change the perception of agriculture for youth in the Philippines and showing that agriculture can 
be both a profitable and exciting career path. 221. Meet youth where they are. Make sure you 
understand the enabling environment around 
access to technology and digital literacy, as well as 
the digital tools or services to which youth have 
been exposed. At the same time, ensure that you 
are being youth-centered from the beginning: 
getting input and feedback early and often from 
youth themselves on the project design. This 
may mean leveraging relationships with local 
organizations or partners. For example, Rana Labs 
implemented their model in collaboration with 
Agrijoven, which was already directly engaging with 
youth in Guatemala. 
2. Recognize that ICTs alone will not solve all 
the problems that young farmers and young 
prospective farmers are facing. Providing 
solutions to other challenges such as access to 
finance, land, and other resources, as well as 
ensuring that youth have access to appropriate 
agriculture-related training and education should 
be considered as complementary approaches. In 
many contexts, agriculture is presented as a low-
skill career, and adequate training opportunities are 
not offered for young farmers to develop the skills 
they will need to thrive in an agricultural setting, 
especially in other value chain pursuits that move 
beyond on-farm activities.3. Leverage interpersonal relationships and 
mentorship. Interpersonal relationships are 
crucial. Of particular importance are strong 
mentors and role models of other youth who 
are creating profitable and successful careers 
for themselves in agriculture. For example, ICT 
for Agri strives to provide the young agriculture 
students who work as interns with mentorship and 
guidance, showing them what it entails to run a 
successful ag-tech startup in Nepal. 
4. Develop programming that recognizes the 
heterogeneity of youth. Their needs differ 
across many factors, including age and gender, 
and successful youth-focused programming in 
agriculture should recognize and design for these 
differences. For example, though an analysis of 
youth in agribusiness in Uganda suggested that a 
perceived disinterest in agriculture cut across both 
male and female youth, female youth in Uganda 
are more significantly affected by constraints such 
as scarcity of arable lands and available time, due 
to cultural and gender norms (Ambrose & Zake, 
2015). When Farmerline started holding Farm Field 
Days in Ghana, they realized that while the events 
were well attended, over 80 percent of attendees 
were male, suggesting a need to create a strategy 
that would appeal to young women as much as 
young men.  RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR HOW TO ENGAGE  YOUTH IN 
YOUR AGRICULTURE PROGRAM
The recommendations that follow can help integrate learnings from the approaches described into agricultural programming 
and ensure that digital tools and youth-focused programming are best used to accelerate progress toward results. 23Y outh of different ages require different 
approaches as well. USAID youth programs engage 
young people aged 10–29, with an understanding 
that youth at different ends of this spectrum have 
different needs and live in very different contexts. 
For example, children and early teenagers are 
typically not living independently, and their parents 
or caregivers are likely to be involved in their 
decision making about education, training, and 
careers. Thus, holistic approaches are important 
to not only address the needs of youth but also 
provide value for parents, mentors, or other 
influences who are involved in their lives. At 
the other end of the spectrum, many youth are 
married, supporting their own families and having 
already completed all or most of their formal 
education. For these older youth, their priorities 
may have shifted from seeking out a well-perceived 
and exciting career path to finding one that is 
profitable and will provide a steady income to 
support a growing family or other future pursuits. 
5. Consider approaches that leverage social 
networks and build community through 
technology . Digital technology, through social 
media and messaging applications, can be a useful 
tool to foster peer-to-peer engagement among 
youth. There is also an opportunity for donors or 
implementing partners to use digital approaches 
to share success stories and highlight examples 
of youth that have cultivated successful careers 
in agriculture to serve as role models for others. 
Sharing these stories can play three distinct roles. 
First, for youth who are participating in agriculture 
but thinking about pursuing other opportunities, 
seeing examples of others who have exciting 
and profitable careers in agriculture could help 
incentivize them to stay on the farm — or in another agriculture-related job — rather than 
seeking out other career paths, while at the same 
time providing them with additional information 
to help improve their farms. Second, for youth 
who may have already left their farms, seeing other 
youth who are successful in agriculture could help 
this youth subset to understand that farming can 
be profitable as well and may encourage them 
to return to agriculture as a career. The same 
would be true for youth who are neither currently 
engaged in agriculture nor ever have been. 
6. Change the perception of agriculture, to 
highlight both on- and off-farm activities.  
In many countries, the traditional perception of 
agriculture has not changed for generations, with 
a vision of hard, challenging labor in the fields. Y et 
with improved seed varieties, new agricultural 
technologies, and novel farming techniques, farming 
can be more productive and more efficient. 
Helping youth to understand that these tools 
and processes can be integrated into agriculture 
can demonstrate ways that agriculture can yield 
a quicker return on investment, and ultimately be 
more profitable.  
 
Additionally, it’s important that youth understand 
being a “farmer” can take many different forms 
— from planting your own crops to working 
for an agrodealer or input supplier to leveraging 
science, technology, and innovation to transform 
the way that farming is done in their community. 
USAID and implementing partners can create 
opportunities for youth to gain the awareness, 
business acumen, and financial support required 
to pursue agricultural paths off-farm as well as 
on-farm.  
 24Making agriculture “cool” is just one piece of the 
puzzle. Changing perceptions is important, but 
even more so is creating ways to make agriculture 
more manageable and more profitable. With the 
right information and training, young farmers can 
be more efficient and productive — perhaps even 
using agriculture as a part-time job or “side hustle” 
to supplement other income. A survey of youth 
in agribusiness in Uganda highlights that youth are 
not necessarily disinterested in agriculture, but 
rather they do not believe it can be profitable and 
efficient. A survey of Ugandan youth from rural 
areas indicated they were interested and involved 
in agriculture, but were predominantly on a small 
scale and part-time, in addition to other income-
generating activities (Ambrose & Zake, 2015). 
7. Use a deliberate and intentional approach 
to engage youth, rather than an “adding on” 
a youth component to an existing approach . 
Addressing the needs of youth may necessitate 
a completely different approach altogether so it 
is crucial to keep this in mind from the scoping 
phase of a new project or activity. For example, 
In a USAID digital extension project in Malawi, there was no plan initially to engage youth. 
However, project staff quickly found that many 
men and women who signed up for the digital 
extension service had challenges in using the 
phone or accessing the information, and it was 
the participants’ children who helped them read 
messages and record information. After that 
realization, youth became a central part of the 
project as digitally savvy focal points  
in communities.  
 
The project also found that when they launched 
a digital commodity exchange platform, many 
young farmers who signed up were working as 
aggregators to collect crops from older farmers 
in rural communities. These youth were not 
only starting their own successful careers in 
agribusinesses, but they were also providing 
support to the older farmers in their communities. 
Only a year before the end of the program did the 
project start to specifically engage youth through 
focus groups, farm field days, and radio shows. Had 
they engaged youth earlier, however, there may 
have been even greater impact.25Principle 1: Design with the User: 
The users, in this case, are most often the young people that a youth-centric project are trying to serve, but 
depending on the age of the young people and the context in which the project is being designed, the user may 
also be the parents, caregivers, or other influencers that help guide youth in their decision making. An approach that 
considers Principle 1 ensures that these users are consulted early in the design process and are able to contribute 
to iteration and adaptation to make sure the approach effectively meets their needs.
Principle 2: Understand the Existing Ecosystem: 
When thinking about ways to engage with youth via digital or mobile technologies, consider what types of devices 
youth have access to, whether they are likely to already have access to the Internet through these devices, and 
which channels or services they are already comfortable using. While youth may be receptive to learning about new 
tools or techniques, make sure they have access to the appropriate tools even after the direct engagement ends. 
If youth already have access to or are comfortable using a tool or technique, and if non-participant youth can also 
access that tool or technique, there may be an opportunity for youth to share the new skills that they have learned 
with others in their communities.
Principle 8: Address Privacy and Security: 
This principle is even more important to consider when designing an activity or approach that engages with youth 
or other vulnerable populations. Extra consideration and caution may be necessary when using social media 
platforms or messaging services to engage directly with youth, to make sure that these youth — and their parents 
or caregivers — understand how the personal information they provide through these services is collected, used, 
stored, and shared. 
Principle 9: Be Collaborative: 
In many Feed the Future target countries, other public-, private-, and government-sector actors are joining Feed the 
Future in a commitment to finding better ways to provide resources for and meet the needs of a growing youth 
population. Sharing best practices, successes, and challenges can help improve the efficiency and impact of youth-
centric activities, and formal, cross-sector partnerships can help effective activities reach even greater levels of scale.BEST PRACTICES:  
THE PRINCIPLES FOR  
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT
When designing programs or projects that incorporate digital and mobile technologies to engage youth in agricultural 
pursuits, it is important that USAID staff and implementing partners consider the Principles for Digital Development , a  
set of nine simple concepts to guide organizations in their use of digital tools for maximum impact and sustainability.  
The discussion below highlights the four most significant and relevant applications of the Digital Principles to youth 
engagement activities. It is intended to be an illustrative, rather than comprehensive, portrayal of how the Digital Principles 
apply in practice. 26With growing populations of youth in emerging 
economies, coupled with the rising age of farmers, 
USAID and other donors and development 
organizations must explore new ways to create and 
manage their agricultural programs in a way that meets 
the needs of countries’ shifting demographics. Y oung 
people seek profitable, prestigious, and exciting career 
paths that will enable them to support themselves and their families. Without a clear understanding of 
how agriculture can provide this such a career path, 
youth are increasingly turning to other options. ICTs 
offer one pathway by which young people can have 
successful and exciting careers in agriculture, and 
the development sector — in partnership with local 
governments, nonprofits, and the private sector — can 
play a critical role in facilitating this pathway. CONCLUSION27REFERENCES
Akorion. 2018. Our Story.  https://akorion.com/about . 
Akorion. 2016. Business Profile.  
https://d3gxp3iknbs7bs.cloudfront.net/
attachments/044ac118-b302-4729-bd49-
aa78b006e4ff.pdf  
Akuba, C. 2017. How 25 year-old Esther Karwera’s 
Akorion serves 60,000 farmers in Uganda. https://
outrepreneurs.com/2017/06/akorion-serves-60000-
smallholder-farmers-across-uganda/#ixzz5Qj66aF6Y .
Ambrose, B., & Zake, J. 2015. Situation Analysis of 
Y outh in Agribusiness in Uganda. Agri-Profocus 
Uganda. https://www.slideshare.net/JoshuaZake1/
situational-analysisofyouthinagribusinessinuganda.
Anyang, R. 2015. Chasing the $42-Per-Farmer 
Dream: How Y outh Are Making Money With ICT in   
Agriculture. https://www.chemonics.com/chasing-
the-42-per-farmer-dream-how-youth-are-making-
money-with-ict-in-agriculture/ .
Dennison, L. 2017. Nepal’s emerging data revolution. 
http://devinit.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/
Nepals-emerging-data-revolution.pdf .
Farmerline. 2018. Farmerline launches new 
CocoaLink Service: A free mobile app that puts 
the power of mobile technology in farmers’ hands. 
https://farmerline.co/2018/05/24/farmerline-
launches-new-cocoalink-service-a-free-mobile-
app-that-puts-the-power-of-mobile-technology-in-
farmers-hands/ .
Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation. 2017. 
Partnership Portfolio. https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/5a7b7b36d55b416e7a7bcd2b/t/5abe52
6e758d462e892caa5b/1522422405101/FTF-007_
Portfolio_Redesign__jp_3.8.pdf .
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2018. 
Harnessing the talent of rural youth in Guatemala. 
http://www.fao.org/in-action/harnessing-talent-of-
rural-youth-guatemala/en/ .Food and Agriculture Organization. 2018. Ghana at 
a Glance. http://www.fao.org/ghana/fao-in-ghana/
ghana-at-a-glance/en/
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2018. Gender 
and ICTs. Rome, Italy. https://www.ictworks.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/7-success-factors-gender-
ictforag.pdf . 
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2011. The State 
of Food and Agriculture. Women in agriculture: 
Closing the gender gap. Rome, Italy.  http://www.fao.
org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf . 
Foote, W. 2018. Meet The Social Entrepreneur 
Behind Africa’s “Uber For The Farm.”  https://www.
forbes.com/sites/willyfoote/2018/08/14/meet-the-
social-entrepreneur-behind-africas-uber-for-the-
farm/#7ad495e62bc5 .
Ghana Ministry of Food and Agriculture. 2011. 
Y outh in Agriculture: Programme Policy, Strategy, and 
Sustainability. http://mofa.gov.gh/site/?page_id=1173 .
Ghana Statistical Service. 2015. 2015 Labour Force 
Report. ”Retrieved from http://www.statsghana.
gov.gh/docfiles/publications/Labour_Force/LFS%20
REPORT_fianl_21-3-17.pdf.
GSMA. 2018. The Mobile Gender Gap, Report 2018. 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/
wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GSMA_The_Mobile_
Gender_Gap_Report_2018_32pp_WEBv7.pdf 
GSMA Intelligence. 2018. https://www.
gsmaintelligence.com/
Hutt, R. 2016. Business is booming in Africa – these 
5 charts show how. World Economic Forum. https://
www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/04/business-is-
booming-in-africa-these-5-charts-show-how .
Kantar Public East Africa. 2018. Evaluation of 
the Don’t Lose the Plot TV Program. https://
dontlosetheplot.tv/documents/19/DLTP_Evaluation_
Report.pdf . 28Kumar, B. 2015. Country of the young. Kathmandu 
Post. http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/
printedition/news/2015-08-12/country-of-the-
young.html .
Kovarik, A. Sept 24, 2018. Interview.
Loken A. 2017. Engaging young women 
entrepreneurs to improve productivity across the 
Guinea agriculture sector. https://www.agrilinks.
org/post/engaging-young-women-entrepreneurs-
improve-productivity-across-guinea-agriculture-
sector.  
Madara, R., Makau, E., & Gwinner V. 2017. “Don’t 
Lose the Plot.” 
National 4-H Council. 2016. 4-H Partnerships 
in Africa. https://4-h.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/02/4-H-Partnerships-in-Africa_
Progress-Report.pdf .
Nepal Government, Ministry of Y outh and Sports. 
N.d. Y outh Vision – 2025 and Ten-Y ear Strategic 
Plan. http://moys.gov.np/sites/default/files/nitiheru/
Y outh%20Vision-2025.pdf.
Paulde, S. 2016. Agriculture in Nepal: How Do We 
Inspire a New Generation to go into Farming? 
https://www.agrilinks.org/blog/agriculture-nepal-
how-do-we-inspire-new-generation-go-farming .
Pew Research Center. 2015. Cell Phones in 
Africa: Communication Lifeline. http://www.
pewglobal.org/2015/04/15/cell-phones-in-africa-
communication-lifeline/ .
Rapsomanikis, G. 2015. The economic lives 
of smallholder farmers. Food and Agriculture 
Organization. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5251e.pdf.
UNFPA. 2014. The Power of 18 Billion: Adolescents, 
Y outh and the Transformation of the Future: State of 
World Population 2014. https://www.unfpa.org/sites/
default/files/pub-pdf/EN-SWOP14-Report_FINAL-
web.pdf.UNFPA. 2014. Adolescents and Y outh Dashboard 
– Ghana. https://www.unfpa.org/data/adolescent-
youth/GH .
USAID. 2018. Nepal – Agriculture and Food 
Security. https://www.usaid.gov/nepal/agriculture-
and-food-security .
USAID. 2018. Program AVENIR – Guinea: Y outh 
& Rural Entrepreneurship DIASA.  https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=rscmyW7Cd0Q .
USAID. 2017. Guatemala. Sector Brief: Agriculture 
Economic Growth Activities. https://www.usaid.gov/
sites/default/files/documents/1862/Sector_Brief-_
Agriculture_August_2017.pdf
USAID. 2016. Y outh Engagement in Agricultural 
Value Chains Across the Future: A Synthesis 
Report. http://www.acdivoca.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/10/LEO-Y outh-Engagment-Ag-VCs-
Across-FTF.pdf .
USAID. 2012. Y outh in Development: Realizing 
the Demographic Opportunity. USAID Policy: 
Y outh. https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/1870/Y outh_in_Development_Policy_0.
pdf.
World Bank. 2017. Employment in agriculture (% of 
total employment) (modeled ILO estimate – Ghana. 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.
ZS?locations=GH .
World Farmers’ Organization. 2017. Digital Farming 
Key to Y outh Involvement in Agriculture. E-Magazine 
Farmletter. https://ypard.net/sites/default/files/
resources/august_farmletter.pdf .
Y outh Policy Labs. 2018. National Y outh 
Policy Overview. http://www.youthpolicy.org/
nationalyouthpolicies/