Evaluating the impact of ICT on teaching
and learning: A study of Palestinian students ’
and teachers ’perceptions
Husam Qaddumi1&Brendan Bartram2&Ali L. Qashmar3
Received: 24 July 2020 / Accepted: 14 September 2020/
#Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
This study aimed to investigate the impact of ICT on teaching and learning from thepoint-of-view of Palestinian students and teachers. A total of 207 school teachers and276 students from 53 schools taking part in an ICT project in Palestine responded to aquestionnaire survey. Results indicated that students in Palestinian public schoolsperceived ICT to have a moderate influence on their learning. Students indicated thatthey face frequent challenges such as: lesson duration, access to modern devices andissues with information research skills. These results contrasted with school teachers ’
views, which reflected a much stronger impression of the influence of ICT on teaching.
Keywords Students ’and teachers ’perceptions .ICT in learning and teaching .Evaluation
of the use of ICT
1 Introduction
Rapid developments in information and communication technology (ICT) mean thatthe last decade has witnessed increasing integration of various forms of technology inEducation and Information Technologies
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10339-5
*Husam Qaddumi
hussam_eteach@yahoo.com; dr.hussamqadomi@pass.ps
Brendan Bartram
b.bartram@wlv.ac.uk
Ali L. Qashmar
alilutfe@gmail.com
1Department of Languages, Al Istiqlal University, Jericho, Palestine
2Institute of Education, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK
3Department of Psychology, Al Istiqlal University, Jericho, Palestineschools. This scientific and technical progress has arguably dominated all aspects of
life, including methods of teaching. Although its role in the beginning was as an aid tothe teacher and the textbook, its success was ultimately linked to the teacher's belief inits classroom usefulness (Bashir 1988 ). Today, the use of ICT in the service of
education in public schools is inescapable. This is due to the fact that societies needpeople who are able to cope with the changes, challenges and developments of the age,
and not least of all, it highlights the growing need for a skilled workforce. A study
examining the proportion of skilled workers in the American labour-force between1950 and 2000 showed a rise from 20% in 1950 to 45% in 1991, and a further increaseto 65% of the total American labour-force by 2000. The study also points to a decline inunskilled labour. In 1950, this category represented 60% of the work-force, while in2000 it had decreased to 15% (Fagan and Lunley 1995 ). These trends reflect growing
worldwide interest in the use of technology in education. For many years now,international and regional conferences have highlighted the need to develop educational
curricula which employ technology in the service of education. UNESCO emphasized
this at the First International Conference on Technical and Vocational Education inBerlin, Germany in 1987, and subsequently at the International Project on Technicaland Vocational Education in 1992, in Australia in 1998, and in Greece, the United ArabEmirates, Ecuador, Kenya, and again in 1999 at the Second Technical and VocationalEducation Conference held in Seoul, Korea (UNESCO 1994 ).
2 The evolving ICT context
The public schools governed by the Palestinian Ministry of Education and Higher
Education have not been isolated from these developments. The use of technology inthe service of education has been of great interest. Educational plans and programswere developed to serve the needs of current and future labor-markets by promotingresearch and other efforts aimed at encouraging the adoption of basic education whichemployed modern technologies in the classroom. Large investments were made to
integrate ICT throughout Palestinian education. For instance, the Palestinian govern-
ment and Ministry of Education (MOE) established a plan to integrate new ICT ineducation with a special focus on elementary schools. New technologies included, forexample, tablets, e-school gates, interactive LCDs, smart TVs and the internet, etc. Theuse of websites and electronic portals is now regarded as an essential element ofeducational practice and a hallmark that distinguishes successful educational institu-tions. Furthermore, it is widely believed to develop teachers' scientific and technolog-ical competences, especially in terms of enabling them and school administrators to
communicate professionally with students and their parents, and to maintain
student records. Palestine is considered one of the most developed countries inthe Middle East region in terms of the number of Internet users, the existence ofinfrastructure designed to connect schools to the Internet over the next 3-5 years,and the state ’s commitment to establishing a new communication portal for
schools, students and parents. The MOE is now so well advanced with regard toICT planning and implementation that Palestine is currently a candidate for settingup a unified portal that combines all p ublic schools under the supervision and
guidance of the Ministry of Education.Education and Information TechnologiesThere is no doubt that the concept of technology was linked to industry for around a
century-and-a-half before it entered the world of education. When it eventually did, itsrole was largely restricted to a range of display and recording devices such astelevisions and tape recorders, and other tools which were rarely designed for thespecific purpose of supporting teaching and learning. Early experimentation andgrowing technological appetites saw the introduction of new audio-visual teaching
techniques. Successive educational developments, accompanied by advances in edu-
cational theory and psychology eventually led to more sophisticated approaches to theuse of technology, and an awareness of the complexities involved.
Early conceptions of the role of technology in education reflected common under-
standings that equated technology with electronic machines and tools - aspectsrepresenting the concrete elements of technology used in daily life. Wider consider-ations concerning technology, in particular the need to carefully plan, manage andevaluate its role and use in the classroom to obtain desirable results, were generally
neglected. Gradually, however, the importance of defining technology as "the system-
atic application of scientific knowledge" gained wider acceptance, based on a growingacknowledgement that ICT includes both theoretical and practical aspects, and the needfor knowledge frameworks to support the effective application of ICT in learningenvironments. The field of educational technology depends on many different fieldsof knowledge - educational studies in particular and applied theoretical sciences ingeneral –to build a knowledge-base for designing, developing, implementing and
evaluating its use within the educational process. This way of thinking emphasises
learning, implementation and evaluation in the light of specific objectives based
primarily on research results in different areas of knowledge to access all availablehuman and non-human resources that can maximise effective learning. Therefore, thetechnology of education is a renewable and vital science which does not stop at thelimits of educational devices but is influenced by theoretical changes and evolvingperspectives in the field, from the School of Behavioural Psychology to the cognitiveschool and then to the structural school.
2.1 ICT in the service of education
Employing ICT in the service of education is one way of developing an individual's
abilities. With the advent of the digital era, new technological implications andpossibilities for teaching and learning are increasing throughout the world and at alllevels of education. The Palestinian Ministry of Education and Higher Education hasthus decided to introduce modern technology into its curricula and educational plans inorder to enhance the teaching of all school subjects across the curriculum stages. This
reflects the Ministry ’s desire and intention to enable teachers to interact effectively with
the digital environment and to meet the challenges of the 21st century. The Ministry ofEducation and Higher Education recognizes the importance of employing ICT in theservice of education as a positive force supporting the process of teaching and learning,at a time when many professionals in the field of educational technologies areexpressing great hopes for the role they play in the educational process. Qiao ( 2009 )
found that the use of ICT in the service of education offers many wide-ranging benefits.These include increased potential for taking into account individual differences; pro-
viding feedback to the learner; increasing achievement in language learning; supportingEducation and Information Technologiesthe acquisition of learning skills and computer literacy; acquiring positive digital habits;
speeding up the learning process; developing problem-solving skills; diversifyinglearning experiences; consolidating concepts; reinforcing historical learning; and re-ducing the burden on the teacher. The Palestinian Ministry of Education and HigherEducation has thus stepped up its programme of employing ICT in the service ofeducation across the various educational stages, especially in basic (elementary) edu-
cation, where it has invested in computer programs to support teachers in the
classroom.
2.1.1 The impact of integrating ICT into educationA number of studies have been conducted on the impact of integrating ICT in
education systems. Bai et al. ( 2016 ) found that integrating ICT in classroom
teaching can be an effective means of impr oving student test scores when compared
with schools that make little or no use of technology. Several studies suggest a
widespread awareness among teachers that integrating ICT could improve teachingand learning by enhancing their teaching methods, and creating a more active andcollaborative learning environment (Bindu 2016 ; Mafuraga and Moremi 2017 ;
Sangrà and Sanmamed 2010 ; Yumurtaci,2017) although some studies have sug-
gested that ICT do not have a great influence on students ’outcomes (Comi et al.
2016 ;M a r c i n o 2018 ; Salomon and Kolikant 2016 ; Steiner and Mendelovitch 2017 ).
Much research has also focused on the impact of ICT integration on students'
performance. In a study conducted by Mbaeze et al. ( 2010 ), the researchers found
no statistically significant relationshi p between the inclusion of ICT and students ’
academic performance, but for those who are disadvantaged ICT remains a hope(BECTA 2003 ; Çelik and Gündogdu 2016 ;K h a ne ta l . 2015 ; Johnson 2014 ;L a i
et al. 2011 ;M oe ta l . 2015 ). Researchers have concluded that the value of ICT in
education may lie more in its ability to make teaching more efficient, varied andinteresting (Hughes 2005 ). Dina and Ciornei ( 2013 ) similarly support the benefits
of ICT but argue that it cannot replace the role of teachers in cases where timely
feedback to students is essential.
2.1.2 Challenges facing the integration of ICT in educationIn its report ( 2013 ), UNESCO shows widespread availability of ICT support services
throughout Palestine even though computer laboratories and LANs are less common.This indicates that Palestine is trying to use ICT in education effectively. IntegratingICT into education often faces several challenges, of course. One of the major
challenges is developing and maintaining the infrastructure components related to
ICT equipment (Alkahtani 2017 ;K i p s o ie ta l . 2012 ; Leung et al. 2005 ;, Salehi and
Salehi 2012 ; Yunus et al. 2009 ). In Frazee ’s(2004 ) research on ICT integration,
educators and experts in the field of educational technology examined the importanceof Web Quest in extending content knowledge and enhancing teaching and learning.Integrating Web Quest was shown to involve a number of challenges, one of which wasa lack of systematic descriptions and guidance on supporting learner interactions withwell-designed Web Quest applications and models. To date, there have been few
scholarly studies on Web Quest, which may impede practitioners interested in usingEducation and Information Technologiesthis approach in designing and delivering effective Web-enhanced guidance for
teaching and learning. According to Sife et al. ( 2007 ), there are three pedagogical
design challenges faced by Web Quest models: enhancing learners ’personal
agency beliefs; sustaining learner engagement; and promoting learners' deepunderstanding and critical t hinking (Williams and Boyle 2008 ). Other challenges
include teacher ‘comfortability ’, teacher confidence and teacher competence.
Several studies have indicated that a lac k of confidence often prevents teachers
from using ICT in their teaching (Alkahtani 2017 ; Peeraer and Van Petegem
2011 ). In terms of the availability of co mputers, communicat ion networks and
laboratories, the statistical report show ed that the average number of students per
computer in all districts in Palestine was 24.6, while the proportion of all schools
connected to the Internet was 77.9% (72.6% when private schools are excluded).
The above studies clearly highlight the importance of reviewing and evaluating
teachers ’and students ’experiences of and perspectives on ICT. Our own experiences
of Palestinian classrooms heightened this interest - discussions with teachers over time
suggested that integrating ICT in education was an aspiration for them, yet day-to-dayinteractions and observations revealed little evidence of this in practice. This situationthus prompted the researchers to explore the reality of ICT integration and experiencesin education, and as such, the study addresses the following three research questionsthat underpinned our enquiry:
(1) How do students in Palestinian public schools perceive the impact of ICT on their
learning?
(2) What are the most frequent challenges facing ICT use from the viewpoint of
students in Palestinian government schools?
(3) How do teachers' in Palestinian public schools view the impact of ICT on their
teaching?
These questions thus provide a basis for evaluating ICT integration in public schools
and for understanding staff and student perspectives.
3 Methodology
In the north of Palestine, there are 53 primary schools. In 2017-18, the academic year inwhich the study was carried out, 2071 students attended these schools, which employeda total of 414 teachers. The study ’s sample therefore draws on 50% of the region ’s
primary school teacher population, and 18% of its student population.
Questionnaire surveys were conducted to collect data from the sampled students and
teachers. Details of the sample are shown in Table 1. Teachers and students were asked
to express their views by completing the questionnaires. The items and domains weredesigned to solicit teachers ’and students ’perceptions of the impact of the ICT on
teaching and learning, the challenges they experienced, and the realities of usingtechnology. SPSS software was used to analyze the data.
The questionnaire was based on research studies conducted by Bai et al. ( 2016 ),
Banerjee et al. ( 2007 ), and Copriady ( 2014 ) which focused on students' perceptions ofEducation and Information Technologiesthe impact of ICT on their learning, the challenges they faced and the realities of using
technology. The Cronbach ’s alpha reliability coefficient for the questionnaire is 0.76.
4 Results and discussion
4.1 Impact on students ’learning
Students were surveyed in order to gain an impression of their perceptions of the
impact of ICT on their learning in Palestinian public schools. Table 2shows the
results.
As stated, students at public schools were surveyed to capture an impression of their
perceptions of the impact of ICT on their learning. As Table 2shows, the resultsTable 1 Details on the sample and population
# Description Number of teachers Number of students
1 Population 414 2071
2 Sample 207 376
3 Number of returned questionnaires 201 3544 Percentage of returned questionnaires 97% 94%
5 Percentage of sample 50% 18%
Table 2 Survey of results of perceptions of students in Palestinian public schools on the impact of ICT on
their learning
No Item Means Percentages Level
1 I learn computer skills inside school much more than outside school. 2.31 58% Low
2 School website helps me initiate and participate in online discussions 2.77 69% Moderate3 Using online resources made me neglect important traditional learning
resources (books...)1.88 47% Very low
4 I understand difficult vocabularies in lessons when I use YouTube 2.99 75% High
5 When teachers use computers inside class this hinders my development
of interpersonal skills1.96 49% Very low
6 Using interactive LCDs de-motivates and discourages me to learn 1.83 46% Very low
7 E-mails are very helpful in having feedback about what I learned. 2.72 68% Moderate
8 The smart board increases academic achievement (e.g. grades). 2.88 69% Moderate9 My knowledge of the lesson increases when teachers use internet
inside classrooms2.81 70% High
10 School ’s educational forum improves my learning of critical concepts
and ideas.2.73 68% Moderate
11 Technology gives opportunities for students communicate effectively
and freely with instructor2.81 70% High
12 School portal helps me receive assignments and feedback online 1.76 43% Very low
Total score 2.40 61% ModerateEducation and Information Technologiesrevealed an overall mean value of 2.40 with 61% of all questions. The results suggest
that students perceived the impact of ICT on their learning to be moderate. Studentsbelieved incorporating the internet within classrooms is important as it increases theirknowledge of the lesson content. A large number of students (70%) suggested tech-nology provides opportunities for them to communicate effectively and freely withtheir teachers. This may be because speaking in front of others in the class may be
difficult for some students. As item 11 suggests, students had a better chance to
communicate effectively with their teachers using social media. They do not feel shyand communicate freely. When asked about the role of smart boards, they indicated thatit increases their achievement. Students appreciated making use of the internet in class(such as using YouTube) as it facilitates learning difficult words. But, as shown, themean of items 1, 3, 5, 6, and 12 was low. A moderate number of students' responsesshow that using the school website encourages them to be involved in online discus-sions, as item 2 shows. Schools ’educational forums seem to moderately influence
students ’critical understanding of concepts, as item 10 shows (M= 2.73, 68%). These
results concur with the studies undertaken by Batdi (2017 ),Dema and Moeller ( 2013 ),
Kabooha ( 2018 ), Kong and Song ( 2015 ) and Ryan ( 2013 ).
4.2 Challenges that limit the use of ICT in the service of the education in PalestineStudents were surveyed to examine the challenges they perceived to limit the educa-
tional use of ICT in Palestinian government schools. The results were achieved by
calculating the means and percentages for each questionnaire item. Students were asked
to identify the challenges they face in learning activities (5-point Likert scale from 1 =strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). Table 3shows the most frequent challenges
facing ICT use from the pupils ’perspectives.
According to Table 3, students reported that they face several challenges with ICT.
For example, relatively few pupils felt that the curriculum leant itself to using ICT (M=1.97, 49%). They also indicated that class time does not allow them sufficient oppor-tunities to utilise the ICT provided by teachers (M=2.27, 57%). Using up-to-date
devices was felt to be a considerable challenge by teachers and students. When asked
Table 3 Students ’perspectives on the most frequent challenges facing ICT use
No Item Means Percentages Level
1 I see that teachers are unable to use internet inside class. 1.54 39% Very Low
2 The curriculum is designed to implement the use of ICT 1.97 49% Very Low
3 Lesson time is long enough to use ICT 2.27 57% Low
4 Classrooms are well designed to suit an ICT environment 2.41 60% Moderate5 I have information searching skills 2.27 57% Low
6 The number of PCs at my school is not enough 2.37 59% Low
7 We have up-to-date devices and teachers use them efficiently 2.32 58% Low8 I am trained well to use YouTube 2.60 65% Moderate
9 Teachers restrict us from using PCs during class or study periods 2.33 58% Low
Total score 2.30 57% LowEducation and Information Technologiesabout their searching skills, students showed that they do not have enough experience.
It seems that students are moderately accustomed to the use of YouTube, however. Thismay be because the majority of students are familiar with such applications at home. Asstudents mentioned, classroom environments were generally considered suitable forICT use, and the number of available PCs was felt to be sufficient. These issues werealso identified by Abdul Razzak ( 2015 ); Bello et al. ( 2017 ); Siri and Shang ( 2018 ).
4.3 Impact of ICT on teaching
The mean value of teachers ’responses concerning their views on the impact of
ICT on their teaching (calculated against the 5-point Likert scale from 1 = strongly
disagree to 5 = strongly agree ) was 3.66 with a percentage of 74.1%, as shown in
Table 4. Teachers reported that ICT was a strongly positive influence on their
teaching, as illustrated by the high level s of agreement they expressed in relation
to the first few questionnaire items, as shown above (e.g. the positive impact of
ICT implementation on their teaching, where the majority of teachers ’responses
ranged from M= 03.4, 67.3% - M= 04.0, 79.7%. They also indicated that ICT wasmoderately difficult to access ( M=03.3, 65.0%) as well as suggesting that a
moderate number of students were frustrated with the use of the ICT toolsavailable. These results concur with Alshmrany and Wilkinson (2017 );Abed
(2018 ); and S a a d a t ie ta l .( 2015 ).
5 Conclusion and recommendations
This study explored students ’perceptions of using ICT in learning at schools and the
challenges facing them. It also focused on the implementation of ICT in schooleducation from teachers ’perspectives.
Table 4 Palestinian public schoolteachers ’views on the impact of ICT on their teaching
No Item Means Percentages Level
1 The use of ICT has influenced my teaching positively so that students
become critical thinkers and able to make decisions04.2 84.3% Very
High
2 ICT has helped me move towards my curricular goals. 04.0 79.7% High
3 I feel comfortable and confident with the use of ICT 3.80 76.0% High4 I feel comfortable with the pedagogical aspects of ICT. 03.8 75.0% High
5 My students showed technical skills that I had not taught them. 03.7 74.3% High
6 Students with learning disabilities in my class were involved when I
used ICT03.7 74.3% High
7 My students were motivated when using ICT 03.5 69.3% High
8 Technical issues got resolved promptly when I needed help. 03.4 67.3% High9 ICT was difficult to access. 03.3 65.0% Moderate
10 My students were frustrated with the ICT tools available 03.2 64.7% Moderate
Total score 3.66 74.1% HighEducation and Information TechnologiesThe results indicate that implementing and supporting the integration of internet
services and other ICT tools such as smart boards in primary school classrooms isimportant for students, in that it will arguably support them in learning languagesbetter, interacting, being more motivated, communicating effectively, e-mailing, think-ing critically in schools forums and exchanging ideas.
The most frequent challenges that students report when using ICT are the lack of
training on the implementation of such tools and the physical environment of their
classrooms which are not designed for such integration. The results of this studyindicate that the Ministry of Education (MOE) should consider the availability ofICT tools in all schools in Palestine; and enable schools to subscribe to online librariesproviding access to e-learning environments both at home and in school. The MOEcould usefully establish a proactive e-learning policy on the integration of ICT atschools. This would enable students and teachers to extend their learning, and teachersto become more effective facilitators of their students ’learning at school. Palestinian
schools should carefully consider how they might adopt a more holistic policy to
address the challenges students face. This would arguably enable learners, teachersand schools to be more proactive. Given that teachers perceive ICT to be a stronginfluence on their teaching, attempts by the MOE to enhance e-learning for schoolstudents and teachers would be welcome. Teachers and students should be encouragedto maximise collaboration and share their experiences of implementing ICT in teachingand learning. More efforts in this domain would be beneficial.
There is clearly a role for the MOE to play in supporting teachers and students in the
use of ICT in school and also at home. One recommendation for teachers would be to
consider strategies for initiating policies that allow them to adopt more active roles withregard to: implementing ICT activities during lessons; supporting the use of ICT forlearning; using methods that support interactive learning; motivating students to beinvolved; and reappraising the methods by which they are better able to meet students'learning needs (Barham 2014 ;H e r n a n d e z 2017;Kong et al. 2014 ;Q t e e f a n 2012 ).
There is a pressing need for the MOE and schools to address the challenges facing
students, and to ensure greater access to ICT resources for all. With greater ICT
provision, schools will be better able to support students with disabilities and to boost
achievement. With suitable MOE and school policies in place, schools will be wellpositioned to become more responsive and proactive in dealing with challenges facingboth students and teachers. A positive partnership between teachers, students and theMOE relies on greater collaboration using interactive technologies and expert supportfrom the MOE. With this, teachers and students will all develop a stronger understand-ing of ICT in the context of education, and how it can positively support learning andteaching. This understanding will, as discussed, contribute to improvements in achieve-
ment, inclusion and student support. This study also suggests that improved student
motivation is a further desirable consequence of a sustained approach to integratingICT in education.
Future studies could use this evaluation of ICT challenges, experiences and impact
as a basis for considering the effectiveness of ICT-based learning policies aimed atschools and home usage. Further ICT studies using quasi-experimental research ap-proaches conducted with teachers and students would be welcome, as would a greaterprovision of training sessions aimed at supporting teachers in ICT practices and
approaches. Another recommendation would be for curriculum planners to focus moreEducation and Information Technologiesexplicitly and carefully on ICT integration when formulating learning and teaching
polices. Attention is additionally required with regard to school infrastructure in orderto ensure and support stronger ICT awareness, training, usage and resource availability.Finally, the authors hope that the study will be a further prompt for the MOE toenhance teachers ’and students ’use and understanding of ICT in the digital age in
which we all live.
Acknowledgments We are most grateful to the teachers, students and the schools who participated in
completion of the surveys and for their support. Thanks also to Ministry of Education for their roles. Wegreatly appreciate the administrative support provided by the governmental schools.
Compliance with ethical standards
Disclosure statement The authors reported no potential conflict of interest.
References
Abdul Razzak, N. (2015). Challenges facing school leadership in promoting ICT integration in instruction in
the public schools of Bahrain. Education and Information Technologies, 2 , 303 –318. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10639-013-9283-7 .
Abed, G. M. (2018). Teachers' perspectives surrounding ICT use amongst SEN students in the mainstream
educational setting. World Journal of Education, 8 (1), 6 –16.
Alkahtani, A. (2017). The challenges facing the integration of ICT in teaching in Saudi secondary schools.
International Journal of Education and Development Using Information and Communication Technology(IJEDICT), 3 (1), 32 –51.
Alshmrany, S., & Wilkinson, B. (2017). Factors influencing the adoption of ICT by teachers in primary
schools in Saudi Arabia. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 8 (12),
143–156.
Bai, Y., Mo, D., Zhang, L., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2016). The impact of integrating ICT with teaching :
Evidence from a randomized controlled trial in rural schools in China. Computers in Education, 96 (1), 1 –
14.
Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). Remedying education: Evidence from two randomized
experiments in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (3), 1235e1264.
Barham, A. K. (2014). Computer integration in Palestinian secondary schools: Theory and practice.
Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. University of Massachusetts - Amherst.
Bashir, A. (1988). Technology in learning and teaching. (trans.) Amman, Dar Al Shoroq.
Batdi, V. (2017). Smart Board and Academic Achievement in Terms of the Process of Integrating Technology
into Instruction: A Study on the McA. Croatian Journal of Education., 19 (3), 763 –801.
BECTA (2003). What Research Says about Barriers to the Use of ICT in Learning ? Retrieved from www.
becta.org.uk/research .
Bello, U. L., Hassan, L. A. E. A. E., Yunusa, U., Abdulrashid, I., Usman, R. H., & Nasidi, K. N. (2017).
Challenges of information and communication technology utilization among undergraduate communityhealth nursing students in Tanta University. American Journal of Nursing Science, 6 (3), 274 –279.
Bindu, N. (2016). Impact of ICT on teaching and learning: A literature review. International Journal of
Management and Commerce Innovations., 4 (1), 24 –31.
Çelik, B., & Gündogdu, K. (2016). The effect of using humor and concept cartoons in high school ICT lesson
on students 'achievement ,retention ,attitude and anxiety. Computers & Education, 103 ,1 4 4 –157.
Comi, S., Gui, M., Origo, F., Pagani, L., & Argentin, G. (2016). Is this the way they use it? Teachers, ICT and
student achievement. Econ Papers. Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/mibwpaper/341.
htm.
Copriady, J. (2014). Self-motivation as a mediator for teachers ’readiness in applying ICT in teaching and
learning. TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 13 ,1 1 5 –123.Education and Information TechnologiesDema, O. and Moeller, A. (2013). Teaching culture in the 21st century language classroom" Faculty
Publications: Department of Teaching, Learning and Teacher Education. 181. http://digitalcommons.
unl.edu/teachlearnfacpub/181 .
Dina, A. T., & Ciornei, S. I. (2013). The advantages and disadvantages of computer assisted language learning
and teaching for foreign languages. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 76 , 248e252.
Fagan, C., & Lunley, D. (1995). Planning for Tech Prep a Guide Book for School Leaders . New York:
Scholastic Inc.
Frazee, J. P. (2004). WebQuest design strategies: A case study measuring the effect of the jigsaw method on
students' personal agency beliefs, engagement, and learning. Doctoral dissertation, University of SanDiego and San Diego State University.
Hernandez, R. (2017). Impact of ICT on education: Challenges and perspectives. Propósitos y
Representaciones, 5 (1), 325 –347.
Hughes, J. (2005). The role of teacher knowledge and learning experiences in forming technology-integrated
pedagogy. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13 (2), 277e302.
Johnson, T. (2014). The effects of information and communication technology on student achievement.
(unpublished master dissertation). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-013-9283-7 .
Kabooha, R. (2018). The effects of YouTube in multimedia instruction for vocabulary learning :Perceptions of
EFL students and teachers. English Language Teaching, 11 (2), 72 –81.
Khan, M. S., Khan, I., Din, S., & Ismail, H. M. (2015). The impacts of ICT on the students ’performance: A
review of access to information. Journal of Research on Humanities and Social Sciences., 5 (1), 85 –95.
Kipsoi, E. J., Chang ’ach, J. K., & Sang, H. C. (2012). Challenges facing adoption of information communi-
cation technology (ICT) in educational Management in Schools in Kenya. Journal of Sociological
Research, 3 (1), 18 –28.
Kong, S. C., & Song, Y. (2015). An experience of personalized learning hub initiative embedding BYOD for
reflective engagement in higher education. Computers & Education, 88 ,2 2 7 –240.
Kong, S. C., Chan, T.-W., Huang, R., & Cheah, H. M. (2014). A review of e-learning policy in school
education in Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Beijing: Implications to future policy planning. Journal
of Computers in Education, 1 , 187 –212.
Lai, F., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Huang, X., & Rozelle, S. (2011). Does computer-assisted learning improve
learning outcomes? Evidence from a randomized experiment in migrant schools in Beijing. Economics of
Education Review, 47 ,3 4–48.
Leung, K., Watters, J., and Ginns, S. I. (2005). Enhancing teachers' incorporation of ICT in classroom
teaching , full paper presented at the 9th annual global Chinese conference on computers in education,
Brigham Young University, Hawaii, pp. 1 –8.
Mafuraga, M., & Moremi, M. (2017). Integrating information and communication Technology in English
Language teaching: A case study of selected junior secondary schools in Botswana. International Journal
of Education and Development using Information and Communication Technology (IJEDICT), 13 (1),
142–152.
Marcino, P. (2018). Impact of Information and Communication Technology on academic achievement for
exceptional student education inclusion students . (unpublished doctoral dissertation) Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/4801/ .
Mbaeze, I. C., Ukwandu, E., & Anudu, C. (2010). The influence of information and communication
technologies on students ’academic performance.
Journal of Information Technology Impact, 10 (3),
129–136.
Mo, D., Huang, W., Shi, Y., Zhang, L., Boswell, M. and Rozelle, S. (2015). Computer technology in
education :evidence from a pooled study of computer assisted learning programs among rural students
in china ,China economic review, 36, part C, pp. 131-145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2015.09.001 .
Peeraer, J., & Van Petegem, P. (2011). ICT in Teacher Education in an Emerging Developing Country:
Vietnam ’s Baseline Situation at the Start of “The Year of ICT ”.Computers & Education, 56 (4), 974 –982.
Qiao, A. (2009). Using ICT for enhancing English teaching: A quasi-experimental study. Information
Technology and Computer Science, 2009 .K i e v .
Qteefan, Gh. N. (2012). The effectiveness of using educational computer games on developing Palestinian fifth
graders' achievement in English language in Gaza governorate. Unpublished Master Thesis. The Islamic
University of Gaza.
Ryan, R.S. (2013). The effect of online discussion forums on student. Learning and student perception of
learning in a. science course at the community college level (Published doctoral dissertation). Retrieved
February 25th, 2018 from https://aquila.usm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1224&context=
dissertations .Education and Information TechnologiesSaadati, F., Tarmizi, R. A., & Mohd Ayub, A. (2015). Utilization of information and communication
technologies in mathematics learning. Journal on Mathematics Education, 5 (2), 138 –147.
Salehi, H., & Salehi, Z. (2012). Challenges for using ICT in education: Teachers ’insights. International
Journal of e-Education, e-Business, e-Management and e Learning, 2 (1), 40 –43.
S a l o m o n ,A . ,&K o l i k a n t ,Y .B .D .( 2 0 1 6 ) .H i g h -school students 'perceptions of the effects of non-academic
usage of ICT on their academic achievements. Computers in Human Behavior, 64 ,1 4 3 –151.
Sangrà, A., & Sanmamed, M. G. (2010). The role of information and communication technologies in
improving teaching and learning processes in primary and secondary schools. ALT-J, 18 (3), 207 –220.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09687769.2010.529108 .
Sife, A. S., Lwoga, E. T., & Sanga, C. (2007). New technologies for teaching and learning: Challenges for
higher learning institutions in developing countries. International Journal of Education and Development
using Information and Communication Technology, 3 (2), 57 –67.
Siri, E., & Shang, G. (2018). Understanding challenges of using ICT in secondary schools in Sweden from
teachers ’perspective. The International Journal of Information and Learning Technology, 35 (1), 43 –55.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJILT-01-2017-0007 .
Steiner, D., & Mendelovitch, M. (2017). "I'm the same teacher": The attitudes of science and computer literacy
teachers regarding integrating ICT in instruction to advance meaningful learning. EURASIA Journal of
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 13 (5), 1259 –1282. https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.
2017.00670a .
UNESCO. (1994). International project for technical and vocational education: Guide to the preparation of
preliminary models for the development of technical and vocational education curricula ,p a r t1 :L i n k i n g
curricula to the needs of the labor market. Amman: UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2013). Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Education in Five Arab States .
Retrieved from http://uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/information-and-communication-
technology-ict-in-education-in-five-arab-states-a-comparative-analysis-of-ict-integration-and-e-readiness-in-schools-en_0.pdf
Williams, B., & Boyle, M. (2008). The use of interactive wireless keypads for interprofessional learning
experiences by undergraduate emergency health students. International Journal of Education and
Development using Information and Communication Technology, 4 (1), 41 –48.
Yunus, M. M., Lubis, M., & Lin, C. (2009). Language learning via ICT: Uses, challenges and issues. WSEAS
Transactions on Information Science and Applications, 6 (9), 1453 –1467.
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.Education and Information Technologies