https://doi.org/10.1177/0033688220907401RELC Journal
2020, Vol. 51(1) 117 –133
© The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:  
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0033688220907401
journals.sagepub.com/home/rel
Impact of Digital Technology 
Training on English for  Science and Technology Teachers in India
Santosh Kumar Mahapatra  
BITS Pilani Hyderabad Campus, India
Abstract
With digital literacies becoming an essential competency for teachers across the world, recent 
educational policies in India emphasize teachers’ ability to use digital technologies for pedagogic purposes and the use of digital technologies by teachers as one of the evaluation criteria for 
ranking institutions. In the absence of any properly established policy on in-service training in 
digital technologies for teachers, such policies cannot be expected to promote effective learning. Moreover, little effort is being made to keep track of the impact of training in digital technologies on teachers’ pedagogic practices. In light of the above background, the proposed multiple-case 
study aims to explore changes in the practices of three English for Science and Technology (EST) 
teachers in India. The main objective of the study is to compare the teachers’ technology integration practices before and after they participated in a 12-hour need-based training programme in digital technologies. Data for the study were collected through questionnaires, interviews, classroom observations, field notes and e-portfolios. Results suggest that the programme had a positive 
impact on their practices and there was difference in the way the three teachers selected, used 
and thought about digital technologies. Factors such as motivation, administrative support, students’ response to the use of technologies, and awareness about students’ language needs shaped their practices.
Keywords
Technology integration, teacher training, impact, higher education, India
Introduction
The global emergence of educational technology has had an impact on the Indian higher 
education system. In 1984, the University Grant Commission (UGC), the supreme body that controls higher education policies in India, initiated the Countrywide Classroom 
Corresponding author:
Santosh Kumar Mahapatra, Assistant Professor, BITS Pilani Hyderabad Campus, K 127, Shamirpet, Hyderabad, 500078, India. Email: santosheflu@gmail.com907401 REL0010.1177/0033688220907401RELC JournalMahapatra
research-article 2020
SI: English for Academic and Professional Purposes in the Digital Era
118 RELC Journal 51(1)
Programme, a television-based educational initiative. With the establishment of the 
Consortium for Educational Communication (CEC) in 1993 and the National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT) in 2009, there were efforts to extend ‘digital lit-eracy for teacher empowerment’ (NMEICT). Since the mission statement of NMEICT was shared and highlighted by the All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), the statutory body for technical education in India, it is all the more relevant for under -
graduate engineering college teachers including English for Specific Purposes/English for Academic Purposes (ESP/EAP) teachers in India. The NMEICT website offers information on flipped and embedded classrooms, creation of digital content, use of web platforms such as Moodle and WebX, and online training programmes focusing on the integration of digital tools, offered by teachers from premier institutions like the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT). However, most of the training programmes are not subject-specific. Moreover, there is hardly any study assessing the impact such pro-grammes have on how English for Science and Technology (EST) teachers teach their students. Further, the English language courses offered in the best IITs do not possess features of properly designed EST or EAP courses (Mahapatra, 2019). As noted by Howard, Chan, Mozejko and Caputi (2015), subject areas do matter in terms of integrat-ing digital tools in teaching.
Review of Literature
Digital Literacies for EST Teachers
The All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) prescribes a model of digital 
literacy, which is not subject-specific, for teachers working in technical institutions in the country. It seems to be based on the definition of digital literacy mentioned on a Government of India portal, Indian Computer Saksharta Mission (ICSM). The ICSM refers to digital literacy as a person’s ability ‘to operate digital devices like computer, tablets, smart phones’ and ‘to send and receive e-mails, browse the Internet, obtain Government services, explore information, do online transactions’ (ICSM, 2017). Laced with ‘technological determinism’ (Jones and Hafner, 2012: 13), this definition ignores the ‘sheer diversity of specific accounts of “digital literacy” that exist’ (Lankshear and Knobel, 2008: 2). ESP teachers in India need to value a variety of literacy practices which their students engage in outside the classroom (Hafner and Miller, 2019), and ‘build upon out-of-class learning’ (Jones, 2016: 296) with the help of digital tools. Parkinson (2013: 156), while talking about teaching of ESP in discipline-specific con-texts, highlighted factors such as ‘Disciplinary culture and values’, ‘Disciplinary sociali-zation’, ‘Genre’, ‘Skills: study skills and the “four skills”’, and ‘Language features’, and emphasizes ‘specific literacies acquired in the context of the discipline’. Ideally, digital literacies of EST teachers should be placed in the same framework. Another framework that may suit EST teachers’ digital literacies needs is Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) (Koehler and Mishra, 2009) which combines teachers’ pedagogi-cal knowledge, content knowledge and technological knowledge.
As stated by Bloch (2013: 385), the selection of technological tools in the case of 
ESP can be related to curricular decisions, which may include learners’ and teachers’ Mahapatra 119
ability and willingness to use technological tools, infrastructural facilities and scope for 
integration in the syllabus. Another important factor is knowing about ‘affordances’ (Elola and Oskoz, 2017: 55) and ‘constraints’ (Jones and Hafner, 2012: 33) of the avail-able tools. Li (2017: 14–17) proposes five principles for integrating technology in ESP: having a clear idea about ‘benefits and roles of technology’, connecting technology with learners’ needs, ‘integrating rather than adding technology in teaching’, weighing the teacher’s role, and utilizing technology to expose learners to authentic use of lan-guage in authentic situations.
Training in Technology Integration for Language Teachers
While there is extensive research on the positive impact of technology integration on language learning (Warschauer, 2002; Kessler and Bikowski, 2010; Hafner, 2014; Chen and Chan, 2019), research on teacher training or development in technology integration has not been as extensive, and thus, more research-based enquiries need to focus on the education of language teachers in technology integration (Kessler and Hubbard, 2017). Fernández and Vázquez (2016: 153) claimed that teacher training in technology integra-tion is inadequate. According to Hanson-Smith (2016: 210), there is a significant ‘gap between the current realities of global computer use’ and teachers’ abilities to use tech-nology for educational purposes. Kessler’s (2007) survey of students studying for their Master’s degree in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (MA TESOL) indi-cated widespread dissatisfaction with their preparation in using technology tools. Hubbard (2008) reported the majority of MA TESOL programmes in the US and Canada did not offer technology training courses, and many that did, offered them only as electives. There are other reports on the ineffectiveness of professional development (PD) programmes on technology integration (OECD, 2015). Since teachers have individual training needs, Liao, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Karlin, Glazewski and Brush (2017) noted that, for a PD pro-gramme to be effective, incorporating appropriate content and adopting an accessible mode of delivery of the programme must be considered carefully. Researchers such as Duran, Brunvand, Ellsworth and Sendag (2012) claimed that PD programmes of short duration may not have a positive impact, while others including Giraldo (2014) reported finding a positive impact on attitudes and the capacity of participants. Probably, what is crucial is post-training support for the teachers (Zhao and Bryant 2006).
Impact of Teacher Development on Practice
The impact of professional development related interventions is not a widely studied area in applied linguistics (Borg, 2018). Considering that in-service training of teachers has received much less research attention than pre-service training (Borg, 2011), studies on the impact of in-service training of college-level ESL teachers in technology integra-tion on their practices are significantly limited in number. As it is important to train college/university teachers in integration of technology (Rienties et al., 2013), more research is required to understand their practice of technology integration (Chai et al., 2013). Chao (2015: 102) argued that the impact of any computer assisted language learning (CALL) teacher education programmes must go beyond a ‘tool-centered view 120 RELC Journal 51(1)
of learning gains’. Research (Gautreau, 2011; Conlon, 2004) suggests that the motivation 
of faculty members has a considerable impact on their technology integration practice. In fact, ‘facilitating conditions’ (Venkatesh and Bala, 2008) may improve teacher motiva-tion to use technology (Teo and Lee, 2010; Fathema et al., 2015) and teachers who have a positive attitude towards technology may help to better integrate technology in practice (Eickelmann and Vennemann, 2017). While evaluating the impact of PD related inter -
ventions, Markiewicz and Patrick (2016) suggested that factors like the role of manage-ment (King, 2011) and understanding of learners’ response to interventions should be analysed along with a few other factors. The current study tried to bridge some of the aforementioned research gaps. First, it aimed to assess the impact of a training pro-gramme on college teachers’ practices of technology integration. Secondly, the training programme moved away from a ‘tool-centered view’ to a holistic view based on the syl-labus content. Thirdly, it tried capturing teachers’ attitudes towards technology, the roles of contextual factors and learners’ responses to integration of digital tools.
Methodology
A multiple-case design (Stake, 2006) was used for the study. As the study involved EST teachers working in colleges, it was necessary to study the impact of technology integra-tion training in their natural workplace setting. To overcome the researcher and single informant biases involved in a single case study (Griffee, 2012), Yin (2003) recom-mended adoption of multiple-case designs. Lastly, case study approaches have also been used for investigating pedagogical interventions related to technology integration (Roblin et al., 2018).
The study aimed to answer the following questions:
••How did the participation of three EST teachers in a need-based short-term training programme on the integration of digital tools shape their practices of technology integration?
••What kind of impact did contextual factors have on the change, if any, in their practices?
Participants
Of the 16 teachers who volunteered to participate in the 12-hour training programme on technology integration, three teachers gave informed consent to be a part of the study. Their selection was also partially driven by their willingness to allow the researcher to observe their classes. Their educational qualifications and experience, which were veri-fied by the researcher, are presented in Table 1. As per their request, their names and the names of their institutions have been withheld from the article.
Methods of Data Collection
Classroom observation protocol: A semi-structured classroom observation protocol, which was intended to be descriptive, not evaluative, was used for collecting data about Mahapatra 121Table 1. Teachers’ Profiles.
Teacher Highest 
qualificationExperience in teaching English 
to engineering 
studentsComponents of formal training in applied linguistics and ESP, and awareness about 
digital toolsWorkplace and focus of teaching 
T1 M. Phil. 
(ELE)Around 4 years -  Theoretical foundations to second language teaching, syllabus and curriculum design, 
methodology, materials design, language 
assessment, needs analysis in ESP
-  Familiar with using Google Drive, Facebook WhatsApp, mobile phone for audio and video recording-  A private engineering college
-  A syllabus, meant for engineering undergraduate students, comprising general reading, writing, listening and speaking skills, grammar and 
vocabulary, study skills, and components of 
professional communication.
T2 Post-graduate 
Diploma in 
Teaching English 
(PGDTE)Around 3 years -  ESL methodology, materials development, 
syllabus and curriculum design, language 
assessment, an introductory course in ESP
-  Familiar with using Google Drive, Facebook WhatsApp, mobile phone for 
audio and video recording-  A private engineering college
-  A syllabus, meant for engineering undergraduate students, comprising theoretical aspects of communication and oral communication, various 
types of general and professional writing, reading 
strategies based on a few general reading texts, and remedial English, phonetics, presentation and 
group discussion, debating and interview skills  
T3 Ph. D. (ELE) Around 8 years -  Theoretical foundations to second language 
teaching, syllabus and curriculum design, methodology, materials design, language 
assessment, needs analysis in ESP
-  Familiar with using Google Drive, Facebook, Tritter, Google Hangout, Skype, 
WhatsApp, mobile phone for audio and video recording, COCA and Turnitin  - A private technological university 
-  A syllabus, meant for engineering undergraduate 
students, comprising general reading, writing, 
listening and speaking skills, grammar and vocabulary, study skills, and components of 
professional communication like writing e-mails 
and minutes of a meeting, maintaining appropriate body language.122 RELC Journal 51(1)
the process of technology integration in the classroom, before and after the training 
programme.
Interviews: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with teachers at different 
points of time during the process of data collection.
Questionnaires: Qualitative questionnaires were used for collecting information from 
the teachers and questionnaires containing a mixture of close-ended and open-ended questions were used with students.
Field notes: The researcher made notes to record information that was not covered 
through the other data collection tools.
E-portfolio: An e-portfolio containing samples from technology integration practices 
was maintained by each teacher during data collection.
The Training Programme
Components of the training programme are outlined in Table 2.
All the digital tools included in this experiential training programme were selected 
after a thorough needs analysis. A hands-on learning-by-doing approach was followed for the programme in which specified skills/sub-skills almost led the discussion on the selection of digital tools.
Data Collection and Analysis
Figure 1 presents the process of data collection and analysis.
First, for each teacher six classes were observed in which they integrated digital tools 
and qualitative data were collected. This was followed by a needs analysis based on classroom observation data, information collected through a semi-structured interview of the teachers, questionnaires for the teachers and their respective classes of students and an analysis of teaching materials, syllabus and assessment tasks. In the next stage,  
a 12-hour training programme intended to address the teachers’ training needs, was Table 2. Components of the Training Programme.
Digital Tools Time spent
I. Academic and professional writing: Google Classroom, Drive and Docs; 
Oxford i-Writer; Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA); Online 
OXFORD Collocation Dictionary of English; Turnitin5 hours
II. Academic and professional listening and speaking skills: Audio-video 
recording with mobile phones; V oicethread; Google Form; Youtube; Facebook; 
TEDx; Say It: Pronunciation from Oxford App; Zoom; WhatsApp; Prezi; Flashback Express5 hours
III. Classroom Engagement: Mentimeter; Poll Everywhere; WhatsApp; 
Facebook Live; Zoom 2 hoursMahapatra 123
designed. The teachers responded to a qualitative questionnaire and were interviewed 
individually immediately after they participated in the training programme. The post-training data collection was done after a gap of four months. During this gap, the researcher organized fortnightly online meetings with teacher-participants to discuss how they were integrating digital tools in their classroom and the difficulties they faced. The researcher allowed and encouraged the teacher-participants, who were in touch with each other on a WhatsApp group, to help each other with the process of integration. In only a few cases, he had to help them directly. For each of the three teachers, who agreed to be part of the study, six classes were observed after a gap of four months. They were interviewed and a questionnaire containing open-ended questions was administered to their respective classes of students. An effort was made to not only collect information about the digital tools being used and the impact of these tools on learning of targeted skills/sub-skills but also the changes observed in the process of teaching and learning of these specific skills/sub-skills.Figure 1. Process of data collection and analysis.124 RELC Journal 51(1)
Data analysis for the study was done in two phases: analysis of individual cases and a 
cross-case analysis. Since data were collected through observation, interviews, question-
naires, field notes and e-portfolio for each case, method-wise sorting of data was done before triangulating them to arrive at findings for each case. First, the researcher expanded the classroom observation notes and field notes into descriptive write-ups (Miles et al., 2014: 71) and an attempt was made to check interpretations of the data with the help of the teachers. Using a two-cycle coding process (Saldaña, 2013), major themes were built and data chunks were categorized under each theme. Specific patterns were captured during the ‘reassembling’ (Yin, 2010: 202) phase. Then the interviews were transcribed and relevant portions were categorized and coded with the help of research questions. Next, a similar approach was adopted to sort and categorize the data obtained through questionnaires meant for teachers. An inductive content analysis (White and Marsh, 2006) was carried out to analyse questionnaire responses of students in each case. Key words and phrases from the responses were highlighted to create a coding scheme which corresponded to the research questions. The e-portfolio data were mainly used for verification of claims and tracing the integration of newly learnt tools. A thematic analy-sis was carried out to classify the e-portfolio data under descriptive categories indicating the quality of integration. The classification was based on principles of content-driven-ness, contextual accommodation, student participation and creativity in adaptation of tools. The triangulation of data for each case and the cross-case analysis were completely driven by the research questions. The cross-case analysis tried to find answers to the posed questions through common patterns traced across the three cases. The differences among the cases were also noted and highlighted to draw attention to the role played by contextual factors in the concerned cases.
Findings
After analysing data for each case, triangulating them and carrying out a cross-case analysis, the following findings were reported.
Impact of the Training Programme on Integration of Digital Tools
The training programme had a visible and significant impact on the way the three teachers integrated digital tools into their teaching of EST. The evidence suggested teachers had begun to think differently about digital tools, their motivation to integrate these tools into their teaching, the suitability of selected tools in relation to the target language compo-nents from the syllabus, and the way they built on their students’ use of digital tools in real life situations. Three major sub-themes emerged from the findings: motivation to explore independently; improvement in ability to select appropriate tools; and building on students’ digital habits.
Motivation to Explore Independently. There was a growth in the teachers’ motivation to 
explore digital tools on their own and try those in their respective teaching contexts. The 
analysis of data obtained through e-portfolio, interviews and field notes, which captured Mahapatra 125
relevant information from the WhatsApp group, indicates there was a rise in the number 
of tools discussed among teachers through these four months (post-training) as presented in Table 3.
All three teachers not only discussed the tools that had been introduced to them during 
the training programme but also developed strategies for finding their own tools. They searched for new tools on www.teachertrainingvideos.com and YouTube and shared information related to tools on their WhatsApp group. It was also observed that they spent less time searching for new tools after finding tools that worked well in their set-ting and suited their purpose.
Improvement in Ability to Select Appropriate Tools. Along with improved awareness about 
digital tools, the teachers also demonstrated an improvement in their ability to select 
appropriate tools for teaching prescribed language components. One can see a significant difference in the choice of tools as evident from a few selected instances displayed in the Table 4.
Building on Students’ Digital Habits. One of the main changes observed in the teachers’ 
digital practices was the way they tried to build on the digital technology their students 
were already using. An analysis of data collected through interviews with teachers, e-portfolios and questionnaires filled out by students indicates that during the post-train-ing period, the three teachers collected more information about their students’ digital habits which included the time spent on different social media platforms and playing games, the activities they were engaged in on those platforms and their preferences about using digital technology. Later, the teacher participants went on to use social media plat-forms like Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp to promote discussions related to aca-demic writing and speaking skills taught in the classroom. These discussions generally focussed on sources of study materials, web tools that could be used for improving writ-ing and speaking skills, and obtaining and giving feedback. T2 and T3, who were more Table 3. Post-training Discussion and Use of Tools.
Teacher First two months post-training Last two months post-training
T1 ●  Discussed and used 10 tools 
included in the training 
program●  Discussed 22 tools included in the training 
program and 4 new tools
●  Experimented with 18 of the training tools 
and 4 new tools
T2 ●  Discussed 25 tools included in the training program and used 20 of them●  Discussed 30 tools including 20 training tools
●  Experimented with 15 training tools and 10 new tools 
T3 ●  Discussed 20 tools included in the training program and used 13 of them●  Discussed 30 tools including 21 training tools
●  Experimented with 15 training tools and 8 new tools126 RELC Journal 51(1)
active on social media, made more efforts in this direction than T1, who was much less 
active on social media.
Impact of Contextual Factors on Change in Technology Integration 
Practices
Several factors such as motivation, support of college administration, students’ response 
to the use of technologies, and awareness about students’ language needs had a direct influence on the teachers’ technology integration practices. Table 5 summarizes the major findings related to the influence of these factors.
Although the highlighted factors had a positive impact on the teachers on most occa-
sions after they had the training programme, factors like workload, time available to prepare for classes and financial and professional incentives provided determined the quality of the impact on the decisions they made regarding integration. As the training in technology integration was driven by teaching components, a good understanding of learners’ specific language needs seemed to become necessary for employing digital tools. The findings showed that while T1 had exhibited some improvement in realizing students’ specific language needs, T2 and T3 had made significant progress in their awareness about students’ specific language needs.
It was observed that T1 did not integrate digital tools in some classes because he had 
to teach around 14–18 hours in a week and saw no reward in terms of reduction in teach-ing and administrative workload which could have encouraged him to make a better Table 4. Change in Teachers’ Selection of Tools.
T1 (Skill/s: from-to) T2 (Skill/s: from-to) T3 (Skill/s: from-to)
- Specific academic writing 
skills: from reading advice 
in the existing language laboratory to writing on Google Docs
- Academic presentation: 
from watching presentations and reading on screen to utilizing 
V oicethread
- Pronunciation: from 
imitating pronunciation of 
discrete words to recording 
conversations on mobile phones and analyzing them in groups for pronunciation errors - Specific academic writing 
skills: from reading advice in 
the existing language laboratory to writing and offering feedback (with track changes) on MS 
Word and COCA
- Academic presentation: from 
watching presentations and reading about them on screen 
to analyzing mobile-recorded 
presentations
- Pronunciation: from listening 
to articulation of discrete 
sounds on an installed software on a PC to making mobile-video projects on mother tongue interference- Writing academic 
paragraphs: from answering 
questions about paragraph writing on a PC to using Turnitin and Grammarly
- Academic presentation: 
from recording with a camera and grading to uploading on Youtube and 
inviting comments from 
classmates 
- Pronunciation: from using 
an online dictionary for 
vowel sounds to analyzing a WhatsApp-recorded speech and sharing comments on a WhatsApp groupMahapatra 127
effort to integrate. However, the administrative loads of T2 and T3 were reduced, 
although T2 was not given his preferred teaching schedule and was not promised any infrastructural or financial support. The administration team of T3’s institution recog-nized his effort to integrate digital tools as a contribution that could lead to a better national rating for the institute. Given this positive assessment the administration encour -
aged him by promising infrastructural support. He was also given his preferred teaching slots. By contrast, T2 continued his own efforts to integrate digital tools for almost three months because he expected the administration would offer some financial incentive, but that did not happen. Consequently, he only integrated digital tools when he had free time.
Students’ Response. The students’ perception of changes and their response to the integra-
tion of digital tools were recorded through two questionnaires, one filled out before the 
training programme and the other, four months later. Table 6 provides a summary of the findings.
In addition, interviews with the teachers and observation of classes provided useful 
information about the students’ response to the integration of digital tools. The results obtained through interviews with teachers and classroom observations further confirmed those collected from students’ responses to questionnaires. The response of students in all three cases was positive across themes, with a small section of students getting wor -
ried about the loss of traditional teaching. Some students commented that they wanted to Table 5. Impact of Contextual Factors.
Factor T1 T2 T3 Impact
Self-motivation High Very high Very high Eagerness and 
enthusiasm to explore 
and integrate digital 
tools to make teaching more effective  
Support of 
administrationEncouraging words but  
workload remains very highConstant 
encouragement 
but no incentive providedConstant 
encouragement 
and support in terms of making changes in schedule to 
accommodate 
such practices and recognitionEnthusiasm does not get 
translated to effective 
integration in all classes (T1 and T2)
Some amount of 
professional satisfaction 
to continue exploration of digital tools (T3)
Students’ responsePositive and enthusiasticPositive and enthusiasticPositive and enthusiasticMakes integration and teaching easy and effective for the teacher  
Awareness 
of students’ 
specific language needsRecognizable Significant Significant Results in better 
selection and 
exploitation of tools128 RELC Journal 51(1)
wait and see the impact of integration on student achievement. The teachers reported 
drawing motivation from students’ positive response. However, they had some fear of losing ‘control’ over students in the process.
Discussion
The study presents the impact of a 12-hour training programme on how three EST teach-ers approached integrating digital tools into their teaching practices. It should be noted that the multiple case study describes a limited number of participants and this needs to be kept in mind when interpreting the findings.
Although it may not be considered significant, the overall positive impact of the 
training programme on the teachers’ integration of digital tools into teaching could be explained by a variety of factors. First, as pointed out by Howard, Chan, Mozejko and Caputi (2015), the programme was specific to one subject area, i.e. EST, and the pro-cess of integration was guided by teaching of EST components, which was recom-mended by Simpson and Obdalova (2014) and Parkinson (2013). In some way, the programme followed a TPACK model advocated by Koehler and Mishra (2009) which emphasized combining teachers’ pedagogical and content knowledge with knowledge of technological tools. Secondly, an explicit effort was made to consider the syllabus components taught by the teachers and the results of a needs analysis which took into account teachers’ abilities, knowledge and practices, and their stu-dents’ digital activities and preferences (Bloch, 2013; Lee, 2017). Thirdly, the selected tools for discussion were easily accessible (Elola and Oskoz, 2017) and there was a clear awareness about different kinds of constraints (Jones and Hafner, 2012), which included knowing about limitations of free versions of tools, and ensuring integrity among students. Fourthly, there was an attempt to make the training sessions experi-ential in nature which was in line with what was proposed by Liao, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Karlin, Glazewski and Brush (2017).
Although it was a short-term programme, the training had positive impacts in the 
form of participant-teachers making efforts to integrate newly learnt technology. They Table 6. Summary of Students’ Questionnaire Responses.
Major sub-themes Percentage of T1’s 
studentsPercentage of T2’s studentsPercentage of T3’s students
More surprises and more fun in the classroomAlmost 60% More than 80% Around 90% 
Learning outside the 
classroomMore than 60% Around 75% More than 75% 
More hands-on training Almost 90% Around 90% More than 90% 
More feedback Most of the students Most of the students Most of the students 
Learning-by-doing 
teaching and assessmentMore than 70% More than 80% Around 90% Mahapatra 129
also searched for suitable digital tools on their own, which contradicts the findings by 
Duran et al. (2012). This may be due to the teachers being highly motivated (Gautreau, 2011; Conlon, 2004) and because they had volunteered to participate. Another factor that possibly contributed to the impact on integration was the continued support, which included discussions and suggestions about new tools and assessment of their impacts, alternatives to paid tools, and teaching, materials and assessment in the EST courses. These elements were all provided to the teachers after their training ended. Zhao and Bryant (2006) talked about something similar. This can also be related to findings of studies based on short-term programmes by Giraldo (2014). Giraldo indicated positive impact but was cautious in making generalizations. It may be appropriate to generalize the impact of this short-term training programme with some amount of caution. Thorough analysis of training needs, awareness of students’ digital habits, initiating training through subject-specific teaching related discussions, providing options related to digital tools, continuing support after training, encouraging teachers to work collaboratively and share their experiences with other teachers working in similar settings, can be a list of factors a short-term training programme may require in order to achieve desired results. It must be noted that teachers are individuals and deeply rooted in sociocultural systems and therefore, may differ in their integration practices, which is exactly what happened in this case.
Factors like the attitude of administration, students’ response and the teachers’ aware-
ness of learners’ specific language needs did influence integration to some extent. The findings of the study confirm the claim made about the role of administration by Venkatesh and Bala (2008). The continued effort by T3, who had a motivating adminis-tration, can be contrasted with less motivation on the part of T1 and T2, whose efforts did not yield as much reward from the administration to integrate digital tools. The implica-tion is that the support of administration can be a major reason for the success or failure of a PD programme. However, the teachers’ self-motivation to use digital tools and the positive response from students acted as potential saviours and morale boosters. These findings are mostly consistent with those of Teo and Lee (2010), Fathema, Shannon and Ross (2015) and Markiewicz and Patrick (2016). Awareness of students’ specific lan-guage needs in this case had to do with the teachers’ knowledge about EST which may include knowledge of needs analysis, syllabus design, methodology, materials design, assessment, and programme evaluation. These factors, as mentioned by Bloch (2014) and Li (2017), shaped the teachers’ integration practices and selection of tools. Though all the three teachers had training in ESP, T2 and T3 worked under slightly more flexible and encouraging managements which allowed them to participate in more professional development programmes and learn more about these aspects, which in turn, resulted in more appropriate and content-driven selection of digital tools on their parts. Since there were explicit discussions on identifying language needs of students, use of science and engineering context in materials, and popular academic genres in EST, the teachers’ awareness about their syllabus content and students’ language needs to be improved. It must also be noted that the training programme adopted a similar approach in which introduction of digital tools was led by specific skills/sub-skills, and the post-training support also included discussions on teaching EST. Together, these factors prepared teachers to integrate digital tools into their teaching of EST.130 RELC Journal 51(1)
This is perhaps the first study of its kind in India and it has several limitations. The 
sample size was limited to three cases, although this meant it was possible to collect in-
depth data in an extensive manner. A second limitation was the duration of the training programme. In the absence of any formal PD programme for ESP/EST teachers and a national policy prescribing ESP teachers to participate in such a programme, it was almost impossible to conduct a long-term PD programme. However, a follow-up of four months was expected to help in bridging this gap. Future studies could also include uni-versity administrators' perspectives and consider the impact of the technology integra-tion on the language learning process.
Conclusion
Research on ESP is almost non-existent in India. The country does not have an ESP teacher preparation programme. However, the issue of the integration of digital tools in education is being taken seriously by the current government. Nonetheless, one may question the quality of training offered on government portals, considering that most portals are not experiential in nature, they are not subject area specific and no formal evaluation studies are carried out to gauge the impact they have . This study is an attempt to offer need-based and EST-specific technology integration training to EST teachers and evaluate its impact on their technology integration practices. The results of the study indicate a discernibly positive impact on teachers’ ability to integrate digital tools into teaching EST. However, further investigation with a larger sample size is necessary. It is hoped that the publication of the findings of this study will prompt further research atten-tion to this area. Empirical studies can push for a change in policy and make the case for ESP teacher education. It is also important that researchers who are supported by the government to conduct training programmes try to carry out tracer or impact studies. Tracer studies can help to finetune existing training models and develop more robust plans for the future.
Funding
The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
ORCID iD
Santosh Kumar Mahapatra  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0077-2882
References
Bloch J (2013) Technology and ESP. In:Paltridge B, Starfield S, The Handbook for English for 
Specific Purposes, 429–47.
Borg S (2011) The impact of in-service teacher education on language teachers’ beliefs. System 
39 (3): 370–80.
Borg S (2018) Evaluating the impact of professional development. RELC Journal 49(2): 195–216.
Chai CS, Koh JHL, and Tsai CC (2013) A review of technological pedagogical content knowl-
edge. Journal of Educational Technology & Society 16(2): 31–51.Mahapatra 131
Chao CC (2015) Rethinking transfer: learning from call teacher education as consequential transi-
tion. Language Learning & Technology 19(1): 102–18.
Chen RW, Chan KK (2019) Using augmented reality flashcards to learn vocabulary in early child-
hood education. Journal of Educational Computing Research 57(7): 1812–31.
Conlon T (2004) A failure of delivery: the United Kingdom's new opportunities fund programme 
of teacher training in information and communications technology. Journal of In-service 
Education 30(1): 115–40.
Duran M, Brunvand S, Ellsworth J, and Şendağ S (2011) Impact of research-based professional 
development: investigation of inservice teacher learning and practice in wiki integration. Journal of Research on Technology in Education 44(4): 313–34.
Eickelmann B, Mario V (2017) Teachers’ attitudes and beliefs regarding ICT in teaching and 
learning in European countries. European Educational Research Journal 16(6): 733–61.
Elola I, Oskoz A (2017) Writing with 21st century social tools in the L2 classroom: new literacies, 
genres, and writing practices. Journal of Second Language Writing 36: 52–60.
Fathema N, Shannon D, and Ross M (2015) Expanding the technology acceptance model (TAM) to 
examine faculty use of learning management systems (LMSs) in higher education institutions. 
MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching 11(2: 210–232).
Fernández ME, Vázquez CS (2016) La larga y compleja marcha del clip al clic. escuela y profe-
sorado ante el nuevo entorno digital. Barcelona: Fundación Telefónica.
Gautreau C (2011) Motivational factors affecting the integration of a learning management system 
by faculty. Journal of Educators Online 8(1): 25.
Gerard LF, Varma K, Corliss SB, and Linn MC (2011) Professional development for technology-
enhanced inquiry science. Review of Educational Research 81(3): 408–48.
Giraldo F (2014) The impact of a professional development program on English language teachers’ 
classroom performance. PROFILE Issues in Teachers' Professional Development 16(1): 63–76.
Griffee DT (2012) An Introduction to Second Language Research Methods: Design and Data, 1st 
edition. Berkeley, CA: TESL-EJ Publications.
Hafner CA (2014) Embedding digital literacies in English language teaching: students' digital 
video projects as multimodal ensembles. TESOL Quarterly 48(4): 655–85.
Hafner CA, Miller L (2019) English in the Disciplines: A Multidimensional Model for ESP Course 
Design, 1st edition. London: Routledge.
Hanson-Smith E (2016) Games, gaming, and gamification: some aspects of motivation. TESOL 
Journal 7(1): 227–32.
Howard SK, Chan A, Mozejko A, and Caputi P (2015) Technology practices: confirmatory factor 
analysis and exploration of teachers' technology integration in subject areas. Computers & 
Education 90: 24–35.
Hubbard P (2008) CALL and the future of language teacher education. CALICO Journal 25(2): 
175-88.
ICSM (n.d.) Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan. Retrieved from Indian Computer 
Saksharta Mission: http://icsmindia.in/NDLM.php
Jones RH, Hafner CA (2012) Understanding Digital Literacies: A Practical Introduction. London: 
Routledge.
Jones RH (2016) Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning, 1st edition. 
New York: Routledge.
Kessler G (2007) Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitude toward technology. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning 20(2): 173–88.
Kessler G, Bikowski B (2010) Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning 23(1): 41–58.132 RELC Journal 51(1)
Kessler G, Hubbard P (2017) Language teacher education and technology. In: Chapelle CA, 
Shannon S (eds) The Handbook of Technology and Second Language Teaching and Learning. 
New Jersey: Wiley Blackwell, 278–92.
King F (2011) The role of leadership in developing and sustaining teachers' professional learning. 
Management in Education 25(4): 149–55.
Koehler M, Mishra P (2009) What is technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK)? 
Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education 9(1): 60–70.
Lankshear CJ, Knobel M (2008) Introduction: Digital Literacies: Concepts, Policies and Practices. 
New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Liao YC, Ottenbreit-Leftwich A, Karlin M, Glazewski K, and Brush T (2017) Supporting change 
in teacher practice: examining shifts of teachers’ professional development preferences and needs for technology integration. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education 
17(4): 522–48.
Li L (2018) Integrating technology in ESP: pedagogical principles and practice. In: Muñoz-Luna 
R, Taillefer L (eds) Integrating Information and Communication Technologies in English for 
Specific Purposes. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 7–25.
Mahapatra SK (2019) Making the case for EST teacher development programmes in India. 54th 
RELC international conference and 5th Asia-Pacific LSP and professional communication association conference, March 11–13. Singapore.
Markiewicz A, Ian P (2016) Developing Monitoring and Evaluation Frameworks. Los Angeles: 
SAGE Publications.
Miles MB, Huberman AB, and Saldaña J (2014) Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (2019) 
National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology 
Mission Document. Retrieved from National Mission on Education through Information and 
Communication Technology: https://www.aicte-india.org/downloads/Mission_Document.pdf
OECD (2015) Students, Computers and Learning: Making the Connection, PISA. Paris: OECD 
Publishing.
Pareja RN, Tondeur J, Voogt J, Bruggeman B, Mathieu B, and van Braak J (2018) Practical 
considerations informing teachers’ technology integration decisions: the case of tablet PCs. Technology, Pedagogy and Education 27(2): 165–81.
Parkinson J (2013) English for science and technology. In: Paltridge B, Starfield S (eds) The 
Handbook of English for Specific Purposes. West-Sussex: Wiley Blackwell, 155–73.
Puentedura RR (2011) SAMR and TPCK in Action. Retrieved from Hippasus: http://www.
hippasus.com/rrpweblog/archives/2011/10/28/SAMR_TPCK_In_Action.pdf
Rienties B, Brouwer N, and Lygo Baker S (2013) The effects of online professional development 
on higher education teachers’ beliefs and intentions towards learning facilitation and technology. Teaching and Teacher Education 29: 122–31.
Saldaña J (2013) The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 
Publications Ltd.
Simpson R, Obdalova OA (2014) New technologies in higher education – ICT skills or digital 
literacy? Procedia – Social and Behavioral Changes 154: 104–11.
Stake RE (2006) Multiple Case Study Analysis. New York: Guilford Press.Teo T, Lee CB (2010) Explaining the intention to use technology among student teachers: an 
application of the theory of planned behavior (TPB). Campus-Wide Information Systems 27(2): 60–67.
Venkatesh V, Bala H (2008) Technology acceptance model 3 and a research agenda on interventions. 
Journal of the Decision 39 (2): 273–315.Mahapatra 133
Warschauer M (2002) A developmental perspective on technology in language education. TESOL 
Quarterly 36(3): 453–75.
White MD, Marsh EE (2006) Content analysis: a flexible methodology. Library Trends 55(1): 
22–45.
Yin RK (2003) Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd edition. Thousand Oaks CA: 
SAGE Publications.
Yin RK (2010) Qualitative Research from Start to Finish. New York: The Guilford Press.
Zhao Y, Bryant FL (2006) Can teacher technology integration training alone lead to high levels of 
technology integration? A qualitative look at teachers’ technology integration after state man-
dated technology training. Electronic Journal for the Integration of Technology in Education 5(1): 53–62.