International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 13 Perspectives of Student Teacher Trainees’ Preparedness and Adoption on 
Integration of ICT in Public Teacher Training Colleges in Kenya  
 
Alice Omariba  
School of Education  
Murang’a  University of Technology, Kenya.  
 
Abstract  
This study was concerned with perspectives of student teacher trainees’ preparedness and adoption on 
integration of ICTs in public teacher training colleges. Effective preparedness and adoption on integration 
of ICTs contributes greatly to the quality of education delivered in an instructional process. The rationale 
was conceptualized from the TPACK model that ICT use in the classroom is important for giving students 
opportunities to learn and apply the required 21st century skill, improves teaching and learning and 
important for teachers in performing their role as designers of pedagogical environments. The cur riculum 
needs academic standards and the development of digital age skills for the 21st century learners to fit in 
the global job market. The literature review focused on the global overview on integration of ICT in 
education, status of integration of ICT in education in Africa, readiness in the integration of ICT in 
education in Kenya and challenges of integrating ICTs in the primary teacher curriculum. A descriptive 
survey research design was used in the study which was conducted in four (4) public primar y teacher 
training colleges in Central region of Kenya. These provided an ideal population for the study. The target 
populations were second year student teacher trainees, College principals and Kenya Institute of 
Curriculum Development (KICD) e -learning O fficers. The major research instruments were questionnaires 
for student teacher trainees, interview schedule for the principals and Kenya Institute of Curriculum 
Development e -learning developers, and observation schedule. The obtained data were analyzed 
systematically using descriptive statistics and presented with the help of frequency tables, figures and 
percentages. Findings of the study revealed that preparedness on integration of ICTs was at an infant 
stage. The study also revealed that the training w as only offering pedagogy, content, knowledge but not 
the technology which make integration a reality in the classroom setting. There were inadequate 
infrastructure to enhance integration and student teacher trainees revealed lack policy that would help 
adoption on integration of ICTs in teaching learning process.  
 
Key Words: Preparedness, Adoption, Integration, Information Communication Technology, Pre -service 
training institution  
 
1. Introduction  
ICT stands for “Information and communication technology”. It refers to technologies that provide access 
to information through telecommunication. It is similar to Information Technology (IT) but focuses International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 14 primarily on communication technologies. This includ es the internet, wireless networks, cell phones and 
other communication mediums. It means more opportunities to use ICT in teacher training programmes to 
improve quality of teachers for teach effectively. According to UNESCO “ICT is a scientific, technolog ical 
and engineering discipline and management technique used in handling information, its application and 
association with social, economic and cultural matters”. Teaching is the main part of the educational field 
in the society. Teachers work more for th e improvement level of our society in the every field and skilled 
teachers can make the creative students in form of the good social worker, politician, poet, philosopher etc. 
for the society. Teachers can play a friendly role with the learner. The rapid d evelopment in technology has 
made innovative changes in the way people live, as well as digital societies. Recognizing the impact of 
technologies in the workplace and everyday life, today’s teacher education institutions try to streamline 
their education p rograms and classroom facilities in order to minimize the teaching and learning technology 
gap between today and the future ( Ratheeswari, 2018) .This study was concerned with perspectives of 
student teacher trainees’ preparedness and adoption on integration  of ICTs in public teacher training 
colleges. Effective preparedness and adoption on integration of ICTs contributes greatly to the quality of 
education delivered in an instructional process. The curriculum needs academic standards and the 
development of d igital age skills for the 21st century learners to fit in the global job market.  
 
1.1. Background to the Study  
The development of skills and knowledge in the use of ICTs is increasingly deemed to be an important 
aspect of preparation for participation in an information society, as integration of ICTs enhances the quality 
of learning and teaching in classrooms. As a result, t eachers and instructors need to be trained in basic ICT 
skills and ICT -based teaching methods to feel comfortable abo ut integration (International Institute for 
Communication and Development, 2007). Despite significant political will and expenditure on equipment 
and training, levels of ICT integration in classrooms for teaching and learning are often low Taylor (2004). 
Further research shows that despite all these investments on ICT infrastructure, equipment and professional 
development to improve education in many countries,  less developed world face more serious problems  
such as massive growth in enrolment and instituti onal development, bad governance, high costs, poor and 
uneven distribution of ICTs and infrastructure, incorrectly viewing ICTs as a problem for organizational 
transformation, not making ICT responsive to the organizational vision and mission, and developi ng a non -
systemic method of implementing ICTs (Mbodila,  Jones and  Muhandji, 2013).  Gulbahar (2007) claimed 
that huge educational investment has produced little evidence of ICT adoption and use in teaching and 
learning.  Student teacher trainees should be prepared to integrate information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) into their future teaching and learning practices.  iiCD (2007) observe that:  
 
          ‘’…education enhanced by ICTs, not only sparks economic development by improving  
               learners’ skills, but it also enhances social development across the community by  
              raising peoples’ awareness of their ability to improve  their health, their  
             environment, and even the way they are governed’.  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 15 Despite the increased availability and support for ICT integration, relatively few teachers integrate ICT 
into their teaching activities (Ertmer, 2005). One of the major problems of using Information 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) in education is to base choices on technological possibilities rather 
than educational needs. The educational effectiveness of ICTs  
depends on how they are used and for what purpose, like any other educational tool or mode of education 
delivery, ICTs do not work for everyone, everywhere in the same way ( Mbodila et al.  2013).  The available 
research has thus far mainly focused on isolated teacher related variables to explain the weak level of ICT  
integration and results show that prospective ICT integration significantly correlates with all teacher related 
variables, except for gender. Building on the results of a path analysis model, prospective ICT integration 
could be directly predicted on the base of teacher thinking variables (constructivist teaching beliefs, teacher 
self-efficacy, computer self -efficacy and computer attitudes in education), and indirectly by the gender of 
the student teachers (Guoyuan, Martin, Johan & Tondeur, 2010) but not p erspectives of student teacher 
trainees and adoption on integration of ICTs which this study sought to investigate.  
 
In some countries, notably the United States and Australia, there is evidence that sectors  which have 
invested mostly in Information Communication and Technology (ICT) have  experienced an increase in the 
overall efficiency of using labor and capital (Pilat, 2004).  
Experience has proved that given proper infrastructure, ICT can be an enabler of socioeconomic 
development (Bhat nagar, 2005). ICTs have the potential to create job opportunities, improve delivery and 
access to health and education. They facilitate information sharing and knowledge creation. Education is 
one of the areas where integration of ICTs provides tangible  benefits. Integration of ICTs in and for 
education is now seen worldwide both as a  necessity and an opportunity (UNESCO, 2009). It plays a great 
role in the three  fundamental aspects of education policy that is access, quality and cost.  ICT increase 
access t o education through distance learning. They provide new and  innovative means to bring educational 
opportunities to a greater number of people of all  ages, especially those who have historically been excluded 
such as the population living  in rural areas, wo men facing social barriers and students with disabilities 
(UNESCO,  2009). Integration of ICTs in education promotes E -learning. E -learning is learning that is  
supported by electronic technology. It involves use of Interactive multimedia, Internet  based lea rning 
(online), Computer mediated learning and campus portal access to  institutional processes and resources 
(Taylor, 2001). However the question is; what is the perspective of student teacher trainees’ preparedness 
and adoption on integration of ICTs?  
To successfully initiate and implement integration of ICTs in Public Primary Teacher Training Colleges 
program depends strongly on the teachers’ support and attitudes. It is believed that if teachers perceived 
technology programmes as neither fulfilling thei r needs nor their students’ needs, it is likely that they will 
not integrate the technology into their teaching and learning. Among the factors that influence successful 
integration of ICTs into teaching are teachers’ attitudes and beliefs towards integrat ion of ICTs (Hew and 
Brush, 2007; Keengwe and Onchwari, 2008). If teachers’ attitudes are positive toward integration of ICTs 
then they can easily provide useful insight about the adoption and integration of ICT into teaching and 
learning processes. Demici  (2009) study revealed that though barriers such as lack of hardware and International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 16 software existed, teachers positive attitudes towards GIS was an important determinant to the successful 
integration of GIS into geography lessons.  
Moreover, research has shown that t eachers’ attitudes towards technology influence their acceptance of the 
usefulness of technology and its integration into teaching, Huang & Liaw (2005). In European School net 
(2010) survey on teachers’ use of Acer netbooks involving six European Union cou ntries, many 
participants believed that the use of netbook had had positive impact on their learning, promoted 
individualized learning and helped to lengthen study beyond school day. However, evidence suggests that 
small number of teachers believe that the  benefits of ICT are not clearly seen. The Empirical survey 
revealed that a fifth of European teachers believed that the use of ICT in teaching did not benefit their 
students’ learning, Korte & Hüsing (2007). A survey of UK teachers also revealed that teac hers’ positivity 
about the possible contributions of ICT was moderated as they became ‘rather more ambivalent and 
sometimes doubtful’ about ‘specific, current advantages’, Becta (2008) whereas Mingaine (2013) study 
established that there was limited supply  of qualified ICT teachers in Kenya and Mioduser, Turksapa and 
Leitner (2000) reported that demographic factors such as age, gender, teachers‟ experience and teachers‟ 
level of education greatly affected the speed at which ICT was conceived and implemented  at Greece. 
Mbodila et al. (2013) argue that  it is very important before implementing the integration and adoption of  
ICTs; to make sure that suitable levels of investment is in place, adequate training, good policy, careful 
planning, streamline the teach ing process, and a systematic approach also are require when integrating 
ICTs in education in order to achieve maximum educational benefits. It is also vital to think carefully about 
purpose of education or the context in which the ICTs can be used before implementation. Grimus (2000)  
pointed out that “by teaching ICT skills students are prepared to face future development based on proper 
understanding”.  The above studies have been done in different contextual framework and not perspectives 
of student teach er trainees in preparedness and adoption in integrating ICTs in teaching and learning. The 
pertinent question one would ask is; what are the perspectives of student teacher trainees’ preparedness on 
integration and adoption of ICTs in teaching and learning ? 
 
2.   Findings of the study  
The findings of the study were based on the objectives of the study.  
 
2.1  Perspectives of teacher trainees’ Preparedness in integrating ICT  
The study sought to investigate the perspectives of student teacher trainees’ preparedness in integrating 
ICT in teaching and learning process. According to the Ministry of Education Science and Technology 
(MoEST 2005) session paper No 1, teachers are an important resource in the teaching and learning process. 
Their preparedness the refore should enable them acquire sufficient subject mastery and pedagogy. Pearson 
moment Correlation analysis was conducted to establish the relationship between how student teacher 
trainees were being prepared to integrate ICT in their teaching career wi th how often they used internet in 
college to prepare for teaching especially during teaching practice. The result showed that there was a 
significant relationship (r = 0.203, P - value = 0.001). This implied that student teacher trainees who felt 
that they  were prepared to integrate ICT in their teaching career often used internet in college especially International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 17 during teaching practice whereas those who felt that they were not prepared to integrate ICT in their 
teaching career especially in teaching practice never u sed internet in college for preparation for their 
teaching as shown on Table 1.  
 
Table 1:  Correlation results between student teacher trainees’ preparation to integrate ICT with use of 
internet.  
    Training preparation   
to integrate ICT in 
teaching caree r  Use of internet in    
college for preparation in 
teaching  
Training preparation   
to integrate ICT in 
teaching career     Pearson  
   Correlation  1   
               .203(**)  
    Sig. (2 -tailed)                   .001 
        N    295                  290 
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2 -tailed).  
 
Additionally, the study sought to find out why the correlation. An item in the student teacher trainees’ 
questionnaire sought to find out if the training prepared them to integrate ICT in their teaching career. 
70.4% felt that the training had prepared them to integrate ICT in teaching and learning process whereas 
29.60% of the student teacher trainees felt that their training had not prepared them to integrate ICT in 
teach ing and learning process as shown on Figure 1.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 : Student Teacher Trainees’ opinion on trainings preparing them in integrating ICT.  
 
Further, the study sought to establish reasons why student teacher trainees were for the opinion that they 
were adequately prepared. The student teacher trainees reported in a narrative form that they were 
adequately trained because they were able to use computers as they were taught basic skills in computer 
such as PowerPoint, access internet and get information, t hey were able to access teaching and learning 
materials and could make reference to textbooks comfortably, ICT was taught as a subject though not 
examinable, the Computer lessons were taught from first year up to 5th term of 2nd year. Moreover, at least 
Had prepared them
Not prepared them29.60%70.40%International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 18 after training the student teacher trainee could try and operate computer programme but not competently, 
the knowledge student teacher trainees got in ICT was relevant in teaching and learning process and in the 
profession as a whole, the skills they had acq uired in ICT would help in searching job opportunities and 
that the training allowed students teacher trainees to have knowledge on ICT and hence could teach the 
ICT subject easily or with easy in the teaching career.  
 The 29.60 % of the student teacher tr ainees felt that the training did not prepare them to integrate ICT in 
teaching and learning because they do not know how to operate a computer since the computers were very 
few for doing practical, there was  limited time for practice, there was no traini ng on integration during 
their ICT training programme, there were incomplete packages taught in college during the training,  the 
teaching and learning resources  needed to be  equipped in the public teacher training colleges, student 
teacher trainees be t rained on how to integrate, ICTs were inadequate, the student teacher trainees were 
being trained about basic skills on computer but not integration of ICTs.  
Moreover, the research sought to find how student teacher trainees rated their skill level on int egration of 
ICTs as they were being prepared as teacher professional. 47.5%  of the student teacher trainees rated fair, 
31.6% of the student teacher trainees rated good, 8.8% of the student teacher trainees rated excellent, 8.4% 
of the student teacher tra inees rated very good whereas 3.0%  of the student teacher trainees rated that they 
had no skill at all as shown on Table 2.  
 
Table 2 : Student Teacher Trainees’ rating of the individual skill level on integration of ICT  
Rating on the skill level  Number of Student 
Teacher trainees  
(N = 297)  % 
No skill at all on integration  9 3.0 
Good  94 31.6 
Excellent  26 8.8 
Fair 141 47.5 
Very good  25 8.4 
No answer  2 0.7 
 
In addition, the study established why student teacher trainees rated their individual skills as good. They 
reported that they were good because they felt that they were able to access information using the available 
computers as they could operate them, a ble to use PowerPoint, access internet even by use of mobile 
phones, able to use text books, blackboards and could prepare and use charts in teaching.   Those who felt 
their rating of the skills were low; were of the opinion that they had fair or no skills  at all because 
accessibility to internet was low due to few computers compared to number of student teacher trainees as 
well as being irregularly taught computer lessons leave alone not well conversant with all the programs in 
the computer, fewer rooms fo r practical, ICTs were not enough for adequate preparation and negative 
attitude of some lecturers towards student teacher trainees’ performance and progress. Further, observations 
from the observation scheduled showed that 60% of the tutors had negative a ttitude towards student teacher International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 19 trainees’ performance and progress whereas 40% of the tutors had positive attitudes on student teacher 
trainees’ performance and progress.  
 
To confirm what had been reported by the student teacher trainees, the research used  Pearson Moment 
Product correlation. The correlation results for the student teacher trainees’ preparedness to integrate ICT 
in teaching and learning in their teaching career with their rating on skill level on integration of ICTs as 
they were being prepar ed as teacher professional showed that there was no significant relationship ( r = 
0.102, p -value = 0.082). This implied that student teacher trainees who had reported that they were 
prepared to integrate ICT in teaching and learning process in their teac hing career still rated their skills to 
be fair or no skill at all as shown on Table 3.  
 
Table 3 : Correlation between student teacher trainee preparedness to integrate ICT and rating on skill level 
on integration of ICTs  
      Training preparation to integrate 
ICT  Rating of skill level  
Training preparation to 
integrate ICT    Pearson  
 Correlation  1 .102 
     Sig.   
(2- tailed)     .082 
      N 295    293 
  
The study drew a conclusion that that the training was only offering pedagogy, content, knowledge but not 
the technology which made integration a reality in the classroom setting.  
 
Furthermore, the study sought KICD e - officers ‘opinion on whether the student teacher trainees in primary 
teacher training colleges we re well prepared for the integration of ICTs in teaching and learning. The entire 
KICD e -officer reported that the student teacher trainees were not well prepared because more training and 
exposure was required to prepare tutors and student teacher trainee s during the training of trainer of trainees 
in Public Primary Teacher Training colleges (PPTTCs). The e -officers reported that student teacher trainees 
were still using manila papers yet computers were in colleges, digital content for use in primary was a lso 
PPTTCs and; tutors and student teacher trainees required utilization of the infrastructure to benefit from 
ICT integration.  
 
Moreover, KICD e -officers opinion as curriculum developers on integration of ICTs in PPTTCs to enhance 
the same at the primary schools in Kenya were that; It was necessary to involve and train tutors in colleges 
so as to fully participate in teaching while integrating ICTs and student teacher trainees needed to acquire 
ICT skills in PPTTCs which they could impart at the primary sc hools.  ICT devices required more training 
and exposure for the successful implementation of projects integration ICTs in teaching and learning.  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 20 2.1.1 Training in the teaching career  
To confirm what had been reported student teacher trainees, further the study sought to establish whether 
student teacher trainees used internet in college for their preparation in teaching and learning especially 
during teaching practice. 75.8% of the student teacher trainees never used internet in college, 7.4% o f the 
student teacher trainees used every time, 9.4%  of the student teacher trainees used once a week, 4.4% of 
the student teacher trainees used once a month whereas 1.3%  of the student teacher trainees used it once 
a year as shown on Table 4.  
 
Table 4:  How often student teacher trainees used internet in college for preparation in teaching during 
teaching practice  
Usage of internet in college  
 No. of student teacher 
trainees  
(N = 297)  % 
Every time  22 7.4 
Once a week  28 9.4 
Once a month  13 4.4 
Once a year  4 1.3 
Never  225 75.8 
No answer  5 1.7 
 
2.1.2 Skills required by the Tutors to prepare student teacher trainees  
Since the study was on student teacher trainees’ preparedness and adoption of ICTs, through principals of 
PPTTCs the study explored whether there had been any ICT training for tutors in the last three years in 
colleges to impart tutors with skills to prepa re student teacher trainees on integration of ICTs. The principals 
revealed that they had been some form of ICT trainings for tutors once every term, two times or three times 
respectively.  Further, an item in the principals’ interview schedule sought to f ind out the principals’ 
opinion on the skills required by the tutors to prepare student teacher trainees. The college principals in 
verbatim revealed that, for the tutors to prepare student teacher trainees on integration and adoption of 
ICTs, they require d to use ICT tools and facilities, prepare teaching and learning resources, good 
communication skills, ICT proficiency teaching skills, internet manipulation skills, basic cabling and safety 
skills, computer skills, educational technology and adequate skil ls in ICT by being trained regularly and 
by being provided with desktops/laptops. The findings revealed lack of proper training in the use of ICTs. 
This concurs with Selwyn (2007)’s study on factors influencing integration of ICT in higher education in 
Vietnam  which revealed that there was a poor slow uptake of ICT in education despite heavy investments 
put in place on integration of ICTs in education which was a similar case in Kenya.  
 
The findings revealed that there was no significant relationship betwe en training on use of ICTs and teacher 
trainees’ rating on skill level on integration of ICTs as they are being prepared for their teaching career. International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 21 The negative correlation implied that those who were trained on use of ICTs tended to rate their skill as 
fair compared to those who were not trained.  The overall statistics showed that there was no significant 
difference between training and teacher trainees’ rating on skill level on integration of ICTs. The study 
therefore views that computers have not transf ormed practice and that access to ICTs is the foremost and 
necessary step in the integration process even though mere access will not automatically lead to integration 
of ICT for teaching and learning.  Additionally, there was lack of proper training in th e use of ICTs and 
that preparedness on integration and adoption of ICTs is at an infant stage. The study concluded that teacher 
trainees were not prepared to benefit from integration and adoption of ICTs to harness quality learning. 
This concurred with Mar uti (2010) study on e -readiness.  Moreover, the training programme did not 
provide prospective student teacher trainees with the necessary skills, competencies and experiences to 
prepare them to integrate ICTs effectively in their teaching profession. The study concurred with Mukiri, 
(2012); Omariba, Ayot & Ondigi (2016) study which revealed that teachers lacked proper training in the 
use of ICTs as they were not exposed to the use of ICT as a teaching resource in teaching despite the fact 
they had ICT qual ifications which does not help them in lesson delivery.  
 
Further, the study concurs with Duran (2000) & Omariba  (2016) study on preparing technology - proficient 
teachers and Maruti (2010) study which revealed that teacher trainees lacked an allocated time within the 
college timetable when they could freely access computer labs to enforce practice as they were expec ted to 
have free time when they could access the facilities and put to practice what they had learned if integration 
of ICTs has to be realized in Kenyan PTTCs whereas Sherry & Gibson (2002) claim that technological, 
individual, organizational, and institu tional factors should be considered when examining ICT adoption 
and integration.  According to  Olaniyi (2006), lack of computers and other resources in educational 
institutions is one of the factors that hinder student teacher trainees’ preparedness in inte grating and 
adoption of ICTs. The same was observed in Nigeria schools where the population of students was 
enormous while ICT facilities were inadequate. Most of the computers in the colleges are of low speed 
with a clock speed of 0.733GHz, hard disk memo ry of less than 10GB and RAM of 256MB.The PPTTCs 
did not have software which were suited for integration development such Modular Object Oriented -
Dynamic learning (MOODLE), Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), Blackboard and Shared Content 
Object Reference Model (SCORM). The colleges offered basic Microsoft office packages which gave 
student teacher trainees basic skills in computers but not integration and adoption of ICTs. Bowes (2003) 
notes that, to use these tools effectively and efficiently, teachers ne ed visions of technologies’ potential, 
opportunities to apply them, training, and just -in-time support and time to experiment only can then 
teachers be informed and confident in their use of ICTs whereas Collins and Jung (2003) observe that ICTs 
can be use d as a core or complementary to the teacher training process if integration has to be realized.  
 
2.2 The relationship between teacher trainees’ training and their adoption on integrating ICTs.  
The study sought to establish the relationship between studen t teacher trainees’ training and their adoption 
on integrating ICTs into their instructional process. It is obvious that for teaching and learning to be 
efficient and effective, integration of ICTs is inevitable. The study explored student teacher trainees ’ 
opinion on the integration of ICTs. 77.8% of the student teacher trainees revealed that integration of ICTs International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 22 greatly enhanced content delivery, 75.4% of the student teacher trainees revealed that integration of ICTs 
influenced understanding of the content  whereas 60.3% of the student teacher trainees disagreed that 
integration of ICTs in teaching was adding extra costs unnecessarily. When looking at the syllabus 
coverage, 59.6% of the student teacher trainees disagreed that integration of ICTs reduced syll abus 
coverage whereas 60.1% of the student teacher trainees reported that integration of ICTs in teaching was 
not adding extra costs unnecessarily as shown on Table 5.  
 
Table 5 : Student Teacher trainees’ opinion on integration of ICT   
 Student Teacher Trainees’ opinion   
Statements on ICT(N = 297)  SD D N A SA Mean  
Integration of ICT in teaching 
is adding extra costs 
unnecessarily  
 112 
(37.7%)  67 
(22.6%)  34 
(11.4%)  47 
(15.8%)  26 
(8.8%)  2.33 
More time is spent when 
commuters are used  134 
(45.1%)  89 
(30.0%)  26 
(8.8%)  32 
(10.8%)  6 
(2.0%)  1.91 
       
Use of ICT reduces syllabus 
coverage  97 
(32.7%)  80 
(26.9%)  33 
(11.1%)  49 
(16.5%)  27 
(9.1%)  2.40 
       
Use of ICTs greatly enhances 
content delivery  15 
(5.1%)  20 
(6.7%)  19 
(6.4%)  123 
(41.4%)  108 
(36.4%)  4.01 
       
Use of ICTs in teaching 
influences understanding of 
the content  15 
(5.1%)  18 
(6.1%)  28 
(9.4%)  120 
(40.4%)  104 
(35.0%)  3.98 
Key: SD=strongly disagree, D=Disagree, N=Neutral, A= Agree, SA= strongly agree  
 
Further, the study sought to establish how student teacher trainees expressed their opinion on integration 
ICTs in the training colleges. 24.2% of the student teacher trainees revealed there were ICTs in their 
colleges sometimes available whenever they nee ded them, 30.0% of the student teacher trainees revealed 
sometimes there was limited knowledge and skills on integration of computers in teaching, 25.9% of the 
student teacher trainees revealed they sometimes used computers to access specific education mat erials, 
29.3% of the student teacher trainees liked browsing the internet to learn and get more information and 
32.0% of the student teacher trainees had accessed the computers every time they were free. The result 
further showed that 35.0% of the student teacher trainees very rarely had enough time to use the ICTs 
whereas 31.3% of the student teacher trainees revealed computers in the colleges were very rarely used for 
teaching special subjects as shown on Table 6.  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 23 Table 6 :  Student Teacher trainee use of the ICTs  
  Student Teacher Trainees’ Opinion  
Statements on use of ICT  
          (N = 297)  A O S R VR 
ICTs are available whenever need 
arises  
 62 
(20.9%)  53 
(17.8%)  72 
(24.2%)  67 
(22.6%)  35 
(11.8%)  
There is limited knowledge and skills 
on integration of computers in 
teaching  
 63 
(21.3%)  32 
(10.8%)  89 
(30.0%)  53 
(17.8%)  34 
(11.4%)  
I use computers to access specific 
education materials  
 42 
(14.1%)  48 
(16.2%)  77 
(25.9%)  47 
(15.8%)  75 
(25.3%)  
I like browsing the internet to learn and 
get more information  
 87 
(29.3%)  51 
(17.2%)  67 
(22.6%)  28 
(9.4%)  56 
(18.9%)  
I have enough time to use computer  16 
(5.4%)  29 
(9.8%)  54 
(18.2%)  86 
(29.0%)  104 
(35.0%)  
      
I have access to computers every time 
I’m free  34 
(11.4%)  33 
(11.1%)  59 
(19.9%)  60 
(20.2%)  95 
(32.0%)  
      
Computers are used for teaching 
specific subjects  49 
(16.5%)  39 
(13.1%)  63 
(21.2%)  39 
(13.1%)  93 
(31.3%)  
A=Always, O=Occasionally, S=Sometimes, R=Rarely, VR=Very rarely  
 
From the means shown on Table 6, the study concluded that the overall impression was that the integration 
and adoption of ICTs greatly enhanced content delivery (mean of 4.01 using the scale of 1 -5). 
In addition, the study sought to find out whether student teacher trainees were aware of an ICT policy in 
college. 59.6% of the student teacher trainees revealed colleges had an ICT policy, 38.7% of the student 
teacher trainees revealed colleges did not have any policy on ICT whereas 1.7% of the student teacher 
trainees had no answer.  Moreove r, the study established from student teacher trainees whether they were 
aware if the government had a policy on integration of ICT.  71.0% of the student teacher trainees reported 
they were aware of the government policy on integration of ICT, 27.9% of th e student teacher trainees 
reported that they were not aware of the government policy on integration of ICT whereas 1.0% of the 
student teacher trainees had no answer as shown on Table 7.  
 
 
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 24 Table 7:  Presence of ICT policy  
Policy on integration of ICT  
(N = 297)   f(N = 297)  % 
College  Yes  
 177 59.6 
 No  
 115 38.7 
 No answer  5 1.7 
Government policy on integration  Yes  
 211 71.0 
 No  
 83 27.9 
 No answer  3 1.0 
 
Further, the study wanted to find out why student teacher trainees embraced the presence of a policy on 
integration of ICTs. The student teacher trainees gave various responses such as; all of the student teacher 
trainees in teacher's training colleges were entitled to learn ICTs, the government was provi ding computers 
to schools and colleges because it was aiming at transforming the analog era to digital era, the government 
policy on e -learning and the determination to make education more digital. All teachers had to be computer 
literate since the governm ent wanted to introduce the issue of laptops in primary schools, ICT as a subject 
was timetabled and tested in the PPTTCs mock exams, certificates awarded and it was a must that all 
student teacher trainees had to pass all subjects including computer as a subject, and on buying computers 
the government had set the policy on the ratio of computer to the number of students going to use them.  
 
However, student teacher trainees felt there was no policy on integration of ICT in colleges because the 
tutors were n ot always in a mood to help student teacher trainees to learn more on ICT, student teacher 
trainees had never seen any policy, the government was full of corruption and it was not easy to implement 
the policy and that the government had promised about the implementation of the laptop project but still 
there were no positive results seen concerning that project.  
 
2.2.1 Conversance with ICT systems being propagated by Kenya Institute of Curriculum 
Development  
Furthermore, the study sought to explore if student teacher trainees were conversant with ICT systems 
being propagated by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD).  An item in the student teacher 
trainees’ questionnaire sought to find out if they were conversant with the ICT system being pro pagated by 
Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD). 56.20% of the student teacher trainees reported they 
were not conversant, 37.70% of the student teacher trainees reported they were conversant whereas 6.10% 
of the student teacher trainees had no  answer as shown on figure 2.  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 25  
Figure 2 : Student Teacher Trainee conversance with the ICT system being propagated by KICD  
Moreover, the researcher wanted to know if the college principals were conversant with the systems 
propagated by KICD since they we re the managers of colleges. The principals from the sampled colleges 
also confirmed that they were conversant with the ICT system being propagated by KICD.  However, they 
revealed that these ICT systems were meant to help in preparation of content to be u sed in secondary 
schools. The principals’ revelation concurs with Jesse, Jesse and Omariba (2016) study on the effect and 
user interface on the utilization and efficacy of educational digital content among secondary school in 
Kenya.  
 
The study concluded t herefore that the influence was both positive and negative. A crucial barrier to the 
integration of ICTs was ICT competence or skills and ICT confidence. A very significant determinant of 
teachers’ levels of engagement in ICTs is their level of confidence in using technologies (Ratheeswari, 
2018) . Jones (2004) observes that age can influence the uptake of ICT for teaching whereas Cox et al. 
(2003) argues that the way ICTs were used in lessons was influenced by teachers’ knowledge about their 
subject and how  ICT was related to it.  The findings revealed that there was no ICT policy in colleges to 
give guidelines on the integration of ICTs. Further, the government has not given clear guidelines on 
integration of ICTs especially in PTTCs. Student teacher traine es were not conversant with ICT systems 
being propagated by KICD.  The concurred with Gode (2013) study on factors influencing integration of 
ICT in teacher training colleges. Prensky (2001) distinguishes between ICT natives who are born in a digital 
world  and digital immigrants who must learn the digital language and for whom ICT will always be the 
second language. Further, he notes that the tutors’ subject domain may influence the use of ICT.  
 
2.3  Teacher trainees’ attitude towards integration of ICTs  
Furthe rmore, the study sought to find out teacher trainees’ attitude towards integration of ICT. Ratings of 
student teacher trainees’ attitude were done based on their responses towards the questionnaire variable 
items asked. In questionnaire item 1 and 2 which inquired; if integration of ICT added extra costs 
unnecessarily and if more time was spent for extra training for ICT respectively, all the student teacher 
trainees who accepted these items were taken to have a negative attitude and were coded 1. In questi onnaire 
item 3, 4 and 5 (Use of ICTs greatly enhances content delivery, Use of ICT reduces syllabus coverage time 
and if use of ICTs in teaching influences understanding of the content), all student teacher trainees who 
Conversant
Not conversant
No answer56.20%6.10
%37.70%International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 26 consented were taken to have positiv e attitude towards integrating ICT were coded 2. Further, a variable 
developed to establish the individual teacher trainees’ attitudes based on the mean responses on the five 
items showed that; 75 (25.3%) of the student teacher trainees had negative attitu de towards integrating 
ICTs whereas 222 (74.7%) of the student teacher trainees positive attitude.  
 
The average attitude of the student teacher trainees in the study was calculated to be 1.63 with a standard 
deviation of 0.24 in the scale of 1 – 2 (1= nega tive, 2=positive). Using this scale, Analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) was conducted on the attitude of the student teacher trainees as determined by their skill levels 
on integration of ICTs as they are being prepared in the teaching profession. The results of  the study showed 
that there was a significant relationship in the skill level on integration of ICTs by teacher trainees as they 
were being prepared as teacher professional (F = 2.690, P value = 0.031) as shown on Table 8.  
 
Table 8: ANOVA table for the st udent teacher trainees’ attitude towards integration of ICT and their skill 
level (N = 297)   
 Sum of 
Squares  Df Mean Square  F Sig. 
Between 
Groups  
 .611 4 .153 2.690  .031 
Within Groups  
 16.459  290 .057     
Total  17.069  294       
 
 In addition, the study revealed that student teacher trainees who had negative attitude towards integration 
of ICTs had no skill at all with a mean of 1.49 whereas those who had positive attitudes towards integration 
of ICTs rated their skill levels to be  good with a mean of 1.66. According to Judson (2006), there was little 
correlation between stated beliefs and the actual practice whereas Ertmer (in Hermans et al.; 2008) observe 
that teachers’ educational beliefs can be barriers to the integration and ad option of ICT. One key area of 
teachers’ attitudes towards ICT is their understanding of how it will benefit their work and their students’ 
learning (Ratheeswari, 2018) .   
 
According to Almekhlafi  (2016), positive attitudes encourage less technologically c apable teachers to learn 
the skill necessary for the implementation of technology -based activities in the classroom. Teachers’ 
perception of technology use also is affected by their belief about the way the subject content should be 
taught.  However, Muell er et al. (2008) observe that positive attitudes towards ICT on learning will not 
automatically lead to the uptake of ICT integration in teaching and learning. Further, the results of the study 
showed that there was a significant relationship in the skill level on integration of ICTs by teacher trainees 
as they were being prepared as teacher professional. It further revealed that teacher trainees who had 
negative attitude towards integration of ICTs had no skill at all even though Judson (2006) observed tha t 
there was little correlation between stated beliefs and the actual practice.  International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 27 2.4 Challenges faced by student teacher trainees’ in an attempt to integrate ICT   
The study sought to explore the challenges faced by student teacher trainees in an attempt to i ntegrate of 
ICTs in teaching and learning problem.  19.4% of the student teacher trainees reported inadequate 
knowledge and skills on integration, 16.4% of the student teacher trainees reported lack of ICT materials 
or limited number of ICT materials, 14.4 % of the student teacher trainees lack of inadequate time, 12.9% 
of the student teacher trainees reported inadequate power supplies which sometimes break connections and 
10.9% of the student teacher trainees reported lack of facilities such as computer lab s while others were in 
minimal percentages as shown in Table 9.  
 
Table 9: C hallenges faced by the student teacher trainees in an attempt to integrate ICT in teaching and 
learning  
Challenges  Number of 
teacher trainees 
(N = 201)  % 
Inadequate knowledge and skills on integration  39 19.4 
   
Lack of ICT materials or Limited number of ICT 
materials  33 16.4 
   
Lack of enough facilities such as computer labs.  22 10.9 
   
Lack of funds and high costs of ICTs  8 4.0 
 
Lack or inadequate time  29 14.4 
   
Lack of computers or inadequate computers in colleges  21 10.4 
   
High number of students in the lab during teaching  3 1.5 
 
Inadequate power supply   which sometimes break 
connections  26 12.9 
   
Lack of security  2 1.0 
 
Negative attitudes  4 2.0 
   
Lack of enough teachers  5 2.5 
   
Poor role model by lecturers  3 1.5 
   International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 28 Unavailability of teachers  2 1.0 
 
Bulky curriculum  and  it might be difficult to draw all 
required pictures  
 4 2.0 
No training on integration of ICT  11 5.5 
 
Expensive ICT materials  7 3.5 
 
Inaccessibility to internet  3 1.5 
 
To confirm what was established from student teacher trainees, the study found out from the principals the 
challenges of integrating ICTs in teaching in public primary teacher training colleges in Kenya. The 
principals revealed challenges such as inadequat e ICT facilities in colleges, low levels of ICT literacy 
among tutors especially on use of modern ICTs, lack of appropriate and relevant content from publishers 
and the ministry, a pathy on usage of ICT in teaching learning process, some tutors ignore usin g the ICT 
facilities available and lack of ICT proficiency skills.  
 
Moreover, principals were further asked to give suggestions regarding the challenges on integration of ICT 
in public primary teacher training colleges.  The principals proposed the need to enhanced budgetary 
allocation for equipment and materials, have regular capacity building of staff and conduct in -service 
training of tutors on integration of ICT, enhance time tabling whereby ICT should be taken seriously and 
be incorporated in th e curriculum and ICT as a subject to be examinable at Primary Teacher Education 
level.  
 
The findings of the study therefore revealed numerous challenges such as; inadequate facilities, lack of 
competence, knowledge and skills in ICT integrations, limited t ime for accessing the computer in the 
college , power blackout, lack of support from college administration and government, college systems did 
not embrace integration of ICTs in all subjects, inadequate training, lack of enough ICTs and negative 
attitude of students, low levels of ICT literacy among tutors especially on use of modern ICTs, lack of 
appropriate and relevant content from publishers and the ministry, apathy on usage of ICT in teaching 
learning  process, some tutors ignored using the ICT facili ties available and initial preparation time is too 
long. These findings concurred earlier studies on ICT infrastructure in PPTTCs (Farrell, 2007 and Hennessy 
et al.2010). Maruti (2010) observed that it was evident that the presence or absence of ICT infras tructure 
was becoming a crucial factor in teachers’ decision to use ICT in teaching. According to Gomes (2005), 
lack of technical support on integration affects the use of ICTs in teaching whereas Gutterman et al. (2009) 
notes that lack of quality teachers  to apply ICT to the existing education systems to poor policy framework 
for integration of ICT.  Tong and Trinidad (2010) observes that without technical support for teachers, 
they become frustrated resulting in their unwillingness to integrate ICT to tea ch. 
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 29 3. Conclusion  
The main question that this study endeavored to find was an answer to the student teacher trainees’ 
preparedness to integrate information communication technology in teaching and learning. Based on the 
findings of the study, this study r esulted in the following main conclusions:  
a) Teacher trainees did not access computers during free time and other ICTs to enable them to 
integrate in teaching and learning process. This implied that student teacher trainees did not have 
access to the internet which meant that rolling out on integration was impeded to a large extent by 
inadequate infrastructure.  
b) The researcher viewed that student teacher trainees were not prepared to benefit from integration 
of ICT to harness quality learning given that  curriculum delivery was done in classrooms which 
were not ICT friendly. Further, the study viewed that ICTs were to a large extent not aiding 
curriculum delivery in PPTTCs and therefore the student teacher trainees lacked exposure on 
integration as they w ere being prepared in their teaching career.  
c) Adequacy of ICTs influences adoption of ICT in the process of teaching and learning. Integration 
therefore should go beyond the use of basic computer packages and textbooks for delivering 
subject specific conten t if integration has to be rolled out.  
Bereiter (2002) observes that; ‘’Learning is facilitated when new knowledge is integrated into the learners’ 
world…” This study will give educators a better understanding of the importance of integrating ICT in the 
process of teaching and learning especially in PTTCs.  
 
4. Recommendations  
The following recommendations were made based on the findings of the study.  
a)  Teachers must have the knowledge and skills to use the ICTs and resources to help all students 
achieve hig h academic standards. Therefore, the curriculum in PPTTCs should be revised to include 
integration of ICTs as a subject in the syllabus which should be examinable at primary teacher 
examination. This will enhance the development of integration of ICTs, des ign and development 
skills, and pedagogical strategies.  
b) Kenyan PPTTCs curriculum should train student teacher trainees on how to integrate ICTs in their 
classrooms by being engaged in the process of ICT -integrated training. Further, promote ICT -
pedagogy in tegration in their teaching by providing ICT -based training environments where on -
demand access to materials; peers, and networks of experts where expertise and advices can be 
obtained and active discussion can take place in relation to technology and peda gogy. (This approach 
of using ICTs to support teachers’ on -going professional development and networking can be very 
effective as long as organized support is provided, Pace, 1999).  
c) High quality, meaningful, and culturally responsive digital content must be generated and be available 
for student teachers trainees in their teaching practices. For many teacher education programmes, this 
formidable task requires the acquisition of new re sources, expertise and careful planning. PPTTCs 
should hence establish strategies in integration of various ICTs with a view to adapt and embrace 
them in the process of teaching and learning.  International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 30 d) There is a critical need of context, culture, leadership and vis ion, lifelong learning, and the change 
process in planning for the integration of ICTs into teacher education; PPTCs administration should 
therefore develop ICTs policy to guide student   teacher trainees on integration, embrace and support 
integration of ICTs in teaching and learning.  
e) The ICT competencies required of student teacher trainees relate to content, pedagogy, technical 
issues, collaboration, and networking. P PTTCs should therefore adopt policies that guide them on 
integration of ICTs in the proc ess of teaching and learning and one of the mandatory policies to be 
adopted is to ensure online ICT competency for both tutors and student teacher trainees.  
f) There is need to develop standards to guide implementation of ICTs in teacher education. Kenya 
Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) should therefore develop and supply the public primary 
teacher training colleges with relevant e -content in all subject areas to ensure delivery of the 
curriculum is integrated with ICTs. Further, The KICD should com e up with clear guidelines on 
integration of ICTs in PPTTCs if Kenyan outputs from PPTTCs have to be relevant with the demands 
of the global job market.  
g) The study established inadequate facilities in the colleges. There is need for essential  
 conditions fo r successful integration of ICTs into teacher education. Thus, important strategies need to 
be considered in planning for the integration and adoption of ICTs in teacher education and managing the 
change process. Further, t he study recommends the MoEST to initiate partnership with private sectors to 
equip PPTTCs with infrastructure to enhance ICT friendly classrooms and install internet in PPTTCs 
through partnership with private sectors to pay for the substantial costs to ensure secure and continual 
interne t connectivity. Moreover, the Ministry of Education should develop an ICT policy on integration 
of ICTs in teaching and learning for PTTCs and ensure it is implemented to the later.  
 
4.1 Future Research Directions  
A study on guidelines on student teacher t rainees’ training in tertiary institutions . 
Realizing the effect of ICT on the workplace and everyday life, today’s tertiary institutions need guidelines 
to restructure their educational curricula and classroom facilities in order to bridge the existing te chnology 
gap in teaching and learning. Restructuring requires effective integration of technologies into the existing 
environment to promote meaningful learning and enhance productivity.  
 
5. Acknowledgement  
The research  was financed  by me during a graduate study.  
 
6. References  
Almekhlafi, A. G. A. (2016). Preservice and in -service teachers’ perceptions of the utility of  
                   e-learning. Digital collaboration tools for teaching and learning. Retrieved on 8th  
                   April 2020 from Journal of education and Social Sciences, Vol. 4, (June)ISSN 2289 - 
                    9855  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 31 Becta  (2008). Harnessing Technology: Schools Survey 2008. Retrieved October 20, 2011 from  
http://emergingtechnologies.becta.org.uk/uploaddir/downloads/page_documents/re  
earch/ht_schools_survey08_analysis.pdf  
 
Bowes, J. (2003). The emerging repertoire demanded o f teachers of the future: Surviving the transition . 
Retrieved, September 1, 2004, from http:// crpit.com/conf papers/CRPITV23 Bowes.pdf  
 
Collins, B., and Jung, I. S. (2003). Uses of information and communication technologies in teacher 
education. In B. Rob inson & C. Latchem (eds); Teacher education through open and distance 
learning . London:  Routledge Falmer  
 
Commission of European Communities,(2008). The use of ICT to support innovation and lifelong learning 
for all. A progress report.  Retrieved April 5,  2008 from http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong 
learning/programme/doc/sec2629.pdf  
 
Cox, M.J., Webb, M., Abbott, C., Blakeley, B.Beauchamp , J. and Rhodes,  
V.(2003). ICT and Pedagogy -a review of the research Literature.  London: BECTA/Df ES  
 
Demici, A. (2009). How do Teachers Approach New Technologies: Geography Teachers’  
                   Attitudes towards Geographic Information Systems (GI S). European Journal of  
                    Educational Studies , vol. 1, no.1.  
 
Duran, M. (2000). Preparing technology -proficient teachers: In C. Crawford et  
al.(eds),  Proceedings of society for Information Technology and Teacher Education.  
Internationa l Conference. 2000, 1343 -1348, Chesapeake, VA: AACE  
 
Ertmer, P.A. (2005). Teacher Pedagogical Beliefs: The Final Frontier in our Quest for Technology 
Integration?  Educational Development Research and Development, 53, 25 -39 
 
Farrell, G. (2007). Survey of ICT and Education in Africa: Kenya Country Report .  Washington, DC: 
World Bank.  
 
Farrell, G. and Shafika, I. (2007 ). Survey of ICT and education in Africa. Summary  
report based on 53 countries,  Washington D.C,  
http://www.infodev.org/lentpublications.353 html  
 
Gode, V. O. (2013). Factors Influencing Integration of Information and Communication Technologies in 
Public Primary Teacher Training in Central Region of Keny a. Unpublished Master’s Thesis - 
Kisii University  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 32 Gomes, C. (2005). Integrating of ICT in Science teaching: A study performed in Azores, Portugal. Recent 
Research Development in Learning Technologies  
 
Gulbahar, Y. (2007). Technology Planning: A roadmap to s uccessful technology integration in schools. 
Computers and Education, 49 (4), 943 -956 
 
Guoyuan, S.; Martin, V.; Johan, V. B. and JO Tundeur (2010). Student Teachers’ Thinking Process and 
ICT Integration: Predictors of Prospective teaching with Educational T echnology. Elsevier Ltd  
 
Gutterman, B., Rahman, S., Supelano, J., Laura, T. and Mai, Y. (2009 ). Global  
                 Alliance for ICT and Development : New York  
 
Grimus, M. (200, 21 -25 Aug). ‘ICT and multimedia in the primary school. Paper presented at the  
                    16th conference on education uses of information and communication technologies’,  
                     Beijing, China  
 
Hew, K. F., & Brush, T. (2007). Integrating technology into K -12 teaching and learning: Current  
                   knowledge gaps and recommendations for future research. Educational Technology  
                   Research and Development, vol. 55, pp. 223 -253. 
 
Hennessy, S., Onguko, B., Harrison, Ang’ondi, Namalefe, Naseem and Wamakote.  
(2010). Developing use of ICT to enhance teaching and learning in east African Schools  A review 
of the Literature.  Cambridge, UK and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Faculty of  Education, 
University of Cambridge and Aga Khan University, Institute for Educational  Development – 
Eastern Africa  
 
Hermans, R., Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., & Vackle, M. (2008). The Impact of Primary School Teacher’s 
Education Beliefs on the Classroom Us e of Computers and Education, 51 (4), 1499 -1509  
 
Huang, H. M. and Liaw, S. S. (2005). Exploring users’ attitudes and intentions toward the Web  
               as a survey tool. Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 21, no. 5, pp.729 -743 
               Internatio nal Society for Technology and Education  
 
International Institute for Communication and Development ( 2007). People - ICT –  
                    Development .  Hague. Netherlands  
 
Jones, A. (2004). A review of the research literature on barriers to uptake of ICT by teachers: British 
Educational Communications and Technology Agency (becta)  
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 33 Judson, E. (2006). How teachers integrate technology and their beliefs about learning: Is ther e connections? 
Journal of Technology and Teacher Education.  14,581 -597 
 
Keengwe, J., and Onchwari, G. (2008). Computer technology integration and student learning:  
Barriers and promise, Journal of Science Education and Technology , vol. 17, pp. 560 –565 
 
Korte, W.B.,and  Husing, T. (2007). Benchmarking access and use of ICT in European schools  
2006: Results from Head teacher and a classroom surveys in 27 European countries,  
elearning papers, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1 -6 
 
Maruti, J. S. (2010) . E-Learning among Public Primary Teacher Training  
Colleges in Kenya. http://www.kenet.org.ke/e -readness  
  
Mbodila, M.; Jones, T. and Muhandji, K.  (2013). Integration of ICT in Education: Key Challenges.  
             International Journal of Emerging Tech nology and Advanced Engineering. Retrieved on  
            8th April 2020 from www.ijetae.com Volume 3, Issue 11, November 2013  
 
Mingaine, L.( 2013). Skill challenges in Adoption and use ICT in public secondary schools, Kenya. 
International Journal of Humanities and Social Science.Vol.3 No.13; July 2013  
 
Mioduser, D. Tur -Kaspa. H. and LeitnerI .(2000). The learning value of Computer based instruc tion of 
early reading skills. Journal of computer assistant learning, 16(1) 54 – 63 Monica: Milken 
International  
 
MOEST, (2005). Kenya ICT Education and Option Paper of 2005 . Nairobi  
               
  Mukiri , I. M. (2012). Preparedness of Mathematics teachers for teaching Mathematics Using ICT in 
secondary schools on Tigania East District, Kenya . A paper presented in the 3rd International 
Conference held in Kenyatta University , July 10th to 12th, 2013  
 
                Mueller, J., Wood, E., Willoughy, T., Ross, C., and  Specht, T. (2008 ). Identifying  
                discriminating variables between teachers who fully integrate computers and teachers with 
limited integration. Computers and Education,  51(4), 1523 -1537  
  
               Mumtaz, S. (2000). Factors Affecting Teachers’ Use of Information and  
                Communications Technology: a review of the literature. Journal of       
                Information Technology for Teacher Education,9(3), 319-342            
                
Olaniyi, S. S. (2006) .E -learning technology: The Nigeria Experience  
               Retrieved July,2017 from http://www.fig.net/pub/fig2006/paper/ts84 -o3 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research         ISSN 2411 -2933       September  2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 34 Omariba, A. (2016). Teachers Preparedness in Integrating Informatio n Communication Technology in 
Training Teachers in Public Primary Teacher Training Colleges in Central Region Kenya, 
Kenyatta University, Unpublished Thesis  
 
Omariba , A; Ayot, H. and S. Ondigi, S. (2016.). Teachers’ preparedness in integrating ICT in publi c teacher 
training colleges in Kenya . International Journal of Education and Research   Vol. 4 No. 9 
September 2016, 201-212,www.ijier.net  
 
Pace, L. (1999). Integration of information and communication technologies (ICTs) through teacher 
professional development: Comparative analysis of issues and trends in seven APEC economie.  
Canada: Judy Roberts & Associates Inc  
 
Pilat, D. (2004). " The Economic Impacts of I CT: A European Perspective ," IIR Working Paper 05 -07, 
Institute of Innovation Research, Hitotsubashi University.  
 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horrizon , 9(5), 1 -3 
 
Ratheeswari, K. (2018). Information Communication Technology in Education . Journal of  
                  Applied and Advanced Research, 2018: 3(Suppl. 1) S45
 S47. Retrieved on 8th April  
                  2020  from  htps://dx.doi.org/10.21839/jaar.2018.v3S1.169.  
Selwyn, N. (2007). The use of computer technology in university teaching and learning: a critical 
perspective. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(2), 83 -94 
 
Sherry, L., and Gibson, D. (2002). The path to teacher leadership in educational technology.  
             Contemporary issues in technology and teacher education , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 178 -203. 
 
Taylor, L. (2004). How student teachers develop their understanding of teaching using ICT.  
             Journal of Education for Teaching. 30 (1), 43-56. 
 
Tong, K.P., and Trinidad, S.G.(2005). Constraints and Conditions of Sustainable  
             Innovative Pedagogical Practices using Technology. Journal of International  Electronic  
            for leadership in learning, 9 (3), 1 -27 
UNESCO (2009). Informat ion and communication technologies in teacher education: a    
            planning guide.  France (Paris) UNESCO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 International Journal for Innovation Education and Research    www.ijier.net    Vol:-8 No-09, 2020 
International Educative Research Foundation and Publisher © 2020    pg. 35 Appendix  
Key terms and Definitions  
Adoption - Is the decision of an individual to make use of technology as the best course of action  
                  available.  
Information Communication Technologies - Encompasses the  
range of hardware (desktop and portable computers, projection technology, 
calcula tors, data‐logging, and digital‐recording equipment), software applications 
(generic software, multimedia resources), and information systems (Intranet, 
Internet) available in colleges.  
 Integration - Is the adoption, inclusion and use of resource   
                         materials/equipment to aid the process of teaching and learning.   
Preparedness:       Training in readiness to fully integrate technology in  
teaching and learning.  
Pre-service training institution: Institutions for students’ training to be  
professional teachers.  
 