sustainability
Article
Preparing Public Pedagogies with ICT: The Case of
Pesticides and Popular Education in Brazil
Joaqu ín Paredes-Labra1,*
, Ivana-Mariel Siri1and Alessandro Oliveira2
1Faculty of Teacher Education, Universidad Aut ónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain;
ivanamsiri@gmail.com
2Instituto Federal de Educaç ão, Ciência e Tecnologia de Goi ás, An ápolis, GO 75131-457, Brazil;
alessandro.oliveira@ifg.edu.br
*Correspondence: joaquin.paredes@uam.es; Tel.: +34-914-972-709
Received: 7 August 2018; Accepted: 19 September 2018; Published: 21 September 2018
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: This article analyzes the conditions through which it is possible to launch a project of public
pedagogy with information and communications technologies (ICT) on environmental education and
pesticides. This is a public pedagogy that is agreed between diverse actors (universities, environmental
agencies, local authorities, schools, and farmers) and adapted to their needs and demands, based on the
study of an ongoing project. The methodology is qualitative, with interviews with key informants and
a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analysis developed with the contestants.
In the development of the project, the conditions in which the theme of the project is lived and worked
by the different actors who were included have been highlighted. The discussions that were held
offered different points of view about the priorities of public health, environmental problems, and
social and economic outputs. Among the conclusions, some difficulties came up about how to start
public pedagogies that are managed by citizenship. The idea came from the community.
Keywords: public pedagogies; environmental education; Service-learning; political participation;
information and communications technologies (ICT)
1. Introduction
There is a great worry about the use of agrochemical products in food production, including
farmers’ interactions with them, and the related dangers for human and community well-being, besides
wildlife and ecosystem impact. This is particularly true in Brazil [ 1]. Thus, it is necessary to warn and
show demonstrate it to the community and students of different levels of regular education. However,
it is in discussion how that can be effectively applied to education, mainly for colleges [2].
“The problem of pesticides: Popular education for human health in diversiﬁed spaces” is a socio-
educational project about the problem of the use and abuse of such products that are part of food
chains. That project aims to bring awareness among different groups. The project is implemented in
Goiás, Brazil, which is a strong agricultural producer.
An ongoing study carried out by one of the members of the research team shows that there
are situations of risk to the lives of small rural producers. There are adults who have worked with
pesticides for more than 30 years. There are young people who have worked in agriculture with their
parents since childhood in many activities such as harvesting, land preparation for planting, land
cleaning, agrochemicals appliance, and other activities. There are children who handle poisons with
their parents. Another fact that brings impact is the presence of children at the planting sites: playing,
harvesting, clearing the crop spaces, and handling containers of pesticides. Many of these children,
on several occasions, were in the midst of spray fumes.
Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377; doi:10.3390/su10103377 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 2 of 12
The use of eight to 12 different prohibited substances is regular. Another worrying aspect was
the contact that people had with those products. As the predominant practice is crop rotation, the
frequency to exposure is high. Most of farmers apply the chemicals at least four times a week to
combat pests. They face risky situations that go from the preparation of poisons to their application.
Farmers handle products without gloves, masks, or goggles. In addition, they prepare the blends
at the application sites. There is a greater risk during the application of poisons, since the farmers
predominantly use a back pump. In some occasions, it occurs with the use of a kind of hose cart and
attached manifold motorcycles and tractors with spray. The choice of the equipment that is used is
made according to the ﬁnancial condition of each farmer. As most of them have low incomes, the use
of the back pump prevails.
Despite the technical differences between the tools, all of them provide a high level of contact of
the manipulator with the chemicals, which gets worse because of the destruction of personal protective
equipment. Their clothes were soaked with poison, and it was in direct contact with their skin hair.
Many farmers reported symptoms of intoxication, as itching, nausea, coryza, “yellowing”, and burns
and redness on the skin. Still, they continued to handle the products without proper protection and
indiscriminately. As a result, there is a high level of cancer in that region.
Most of producers have never attended courses on the use of pesticides or their risks. The information
they have is given by the agronomists of the agricultural houses, or it is that which appears in the package
leaflets. The conventional production that is adopted implies the use of poisons, with a resulting
discomfort that is related to the lack of safety information. The lack of knowledge about the products
used and their handling was evident.
Different strategies could be developed. Formal education (a deliberated activity conducting to
title) could be one of them. Vocational and continuous training and school actions with children could
be some of them. However, some problems such as contents managed, time to participate, and trained
professionals to share it with are limits. In the rural context, with family farms, it could be necessary
to implement new strategies. This could be projects of non-formal education (educational programs
with objectives but not conducting to titles) or informal education (less organized or structured,
self-directed, family-directed, or social-directed, obtained by media or contact with trained people
or cultural products as print materials or exhibitions). For this, popular education strategies will be
implemented involving professionals and stakeholders from all sectors of society [ 3]. The project
counts with information and communication technologies (ICT) to deliver it.
Popular education is a kind of informal education; it is a public pedagogy where citizens outside
school gain spontaneous learning [ 4] through different agents: mass media, advertisements, posters, video
channels on the network, etc., and they are engaged in the production and dissemination of messages.
In the sixties, Umberto Eco analyzed the role of media in modern societies [ 5]. The media have
the purpose of training, informing, and entertaining the general population. Their programs must take
this into account. Today, the consumption of audiovisual media is huge, thanks to social networks.
Public spaces that distribute content thanks to networks are committed to respect the same principles
as the public media, in our case particularly training the general population. In the ﬁrst place, public
media are public bodies with a social commitment. However, this commitment is also based on the
idea that the effects of these media reach many people. It is possible to prepare the population to
become the producers of ethically responsible content, thanks to the processes of media literacy that
occur in schools. There are already ethically responsible production processes sustained by the general
population in education projects based on arts [ 6]. There have been processes of empowerment for the
population with ICT [ 7] to look for sensitive information for the community. Processes of audiovisual
production are lacking for a social problem that is sensitive to society, as pesticides are. Citizens as
witnesses using YouTube could be part of a new frontier of popular education through media [8].
Universities participating in the project share with other public stakeholders a marked interest
in carrying out community service or extension activities, as a form of popular education, that linkSustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 3 of 12
universities and communities, with the help of environmental agencies, local authorities, and schools
under the conviction that higher education can and must face the problem.
However, the implementation of the project is not a purely technical problem, but rather a rethinking
of the role of higher education institutions and their relationship with educational and community entities.
In addition, it gives a privileged role to the use of ICT as tools for the distribution of popular education
content that is negotiated, authorized, and put into circulation by the recipients themselves.
Popular education is also a way to attract people out of schools to formal education. Brazil is
now living the phenomenon of the “Institutos Federais de Educaç ão, Ciência e Tecnologia” (Federal
Colleges of Education, Science and Technology). There are 500 campi all over the country, and one
million students located in very poor neighborhoods. The Instituto Federal de Goi ás (IFG) is one of
these campi in Goi ás, Brazil, offering technical training to adults and thus helping them to become
skilled workers and obtain professional university degrees.
This article discusses the conditions in which it is possible to launch a project of public pedagogy
with ICT, which is agreed between diverse actors, and adapted to their needs and demands based
on the study of an ongoing project. To situate the project, ﬁrstly there was an engagement between
the universities and communities through service-learning. Then, we introduced the role of media as
a tool to enhance this engagement.
Problematizing pesticides aroused as a concern of the university and higher education institutions
about their consequences to the population in general.
As it was announced, the project was promoted particularly by evaluating the impact of pesticides
on the diet and health of agricultural workers in Brazil by IFG. Then, the university considered how to
diversify the project through different popular education strategies.
There are different theoretical perspectives of the university–community relationship. From a
managerialist perspective, the task of university extension is a “corporate” or “educational”
social responsibility. It focuses on organizational management and the transmission of attitudes of
social commitment.
However, our theoretical framework is sited on a political level, in which the university is
permeable to the problems of its international, national, and above all, local context; in the latter, its
ultimate goal is to build knowledge to respond to the needs of society and culture. From this model of
service from the university to the community, dialogue and communication between the university
community and civil society actors is essential [9].
The goal of education “can hide the reality of domination and alienation or, on the contrary,
denounce them, announce other ways, thus converting it into an emancipating tool” ([ 10], p. 74).
To achieve this, the academy must generate projects of democratic participation with the objectives
of awareness (as a ﬁrst step) and transformation of reality, providing tools and resources to the
population to build and produce knowledge. There is an awareness of reality, desire, exchange actions,
commitment, and co-responsibility when people are involved from the beginning of a transformation
project; they make it theirs. When all voices are heard and considered, it creates common spaces of
thought, reﬂection, and decision-making ([11] p. 131). All this can help generate new realities.
This way, we believe that ICT could share knowledge, bring about new and different realities,
favor new public and educational readings, and create networks and learning communities, but above
all, create new habits that favorably affect the population. The community will use it by itself to
investigate the problems that concern them.
This vision of the extended university also holds onto the advantages and beneﬁts that it
would have for the university itself. Service-learning is a pedagogical methodology that is based
on a competency model that favors learning in educational institutions through participation in real
experiences of local community improvement [ 12]. In addition, it supports the importance of the
development of service-learning methodologies in educational institutions, differentiating them from
community service activities. Service-learning requires an institutionalization by the school or the
universities; actions must be planned where pedagogical goals and curricular contents are articulated.Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 4 of 12
The institution proposes developing solidarity action with a broad educational purpose (linked to
education in values and attitudes), but does not formally plan the articulation between the community
activity and the curricular contents that are developed in the classroom.
Environmental education is an area that can provide vast ﬁelds of collaborative projects between
higher education and the problems of the communities.
However, in the ﬁeld of environmental education, it is important to remember that a polysemy
prevails in different ways of conceiving it, ranging from the transmission of information about the
natural environment to the dialectic of human relations. From this polysemy, the heterogeneity of
intentions emerges, which results in varied ideological perspectives [13–15].
In environmental education discourses, there is a strong tendency toward approaches of natural
components, and pollution generally prevails. With this, emphasis is placed on the biological and
physicochemical characteristics of environmental degradation, which are privileged to the detriment
of the political, social, and economic dimensions of the environment.
Conceiving environmental education exclusively for the reduction of degradation is the same as
reducing it to a space management instrument [ 16]. The limitations and risks of misunderstandings
become greater when views based on these assumptions disregard other important socio-environmental
dimensions. Thus, the predominance of a depoliticized vision and the absence of critical positions
become common, contributing to the prevalence of hegemonic interests in social contexts.
According to that, concerns about natural aspects contribute more to “greening” the thinking
of society than to reducing the interpretation of socio-environmental issues to the description of
natural systems; this has been shown to be true [ 17]. This way, it still points out that perspectives
that are focused primarily on this dimension promote the displacement of the vision onto the
socio-environmental problem, referring to simplistic understandings and inserted in a “natural”
order [ 18]. Thus, we emphasize that the critical perspective of environmental education guides the
perspective of this study. We assume that only information about the natural components of space is
insufﬁcient and that, faced with so many adverse issues of the present time, it is necessary to critically
train people to deal with adverse situations that endanger human survival.
The critical view of environmental education may be part of a process that is capable of providing
subsidies for the challenges of contemporary life. We believe this referential, as it considers the human
being inserted in the space of socio-environmental dimensions; the life in its complexity and the
understanding of the environmental issues are not restricted only to the natural dimensions of the
space [19].
The main purpose of critical environmental education is based on the formation of a person that
is capable of identifying, questioning, proposing solutions, and acting in the face of adverse social
situations. In addition, the development of these capacities is due to the very involvement of the
people in their social, political, and economic contexts [20].
In this sense, the critical perspective of subsidiary environmental education, through the formation
of contextualized knowledge, becomes a more complex and instrumented reading of the world for
the intervention [ 16], with this knowledge being constituted by the interaction with the other and
situated in the socio-environmental dimensions of agents’ lives. However, it is important to emphasize
that knowledge alone does not guarantee changes in adverse social conditions. They are given by the
very intervention of the people whose collective action is fundamental, since it potentiates a greater
involvement of the subjects and stimulates the formation of leaderships that invigorate the social
group [21–23].
The formation of knowledge among farmers, contextualized in situations of risks experienced
by the use of pesticides, would be an instrument of emancipation in this action research. In this area,
information is considered to be one of the main means for the construction of this knowledge, since
it allows the subjects to judge the situations experienced. The information increases the capacity of
identifying, analyzing, exercising rights, and claiming service provisions, among other citizenship
exercises [15,16,23].Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 5 of 12
Apparently, the university still does not fully take its transformation to be a partner of professionals
and citizens for environmental education. The first obstacles are the poor applicability of policies,
the difficultly of training of new professionals, and the lack of full knowledge about environmental
pedagogy [ 24,25]. “There is a tendency to conceive environmental education within the complex
perspective; while the position of conscience, care, and preservation has less support from the community.
Likewise, the most attenuated tendency assumes that in the processes of environmental education, the
subjects are related in a horizontal way, where the different knowledge and forms of knowledge are
valid and contribute to collective learning and complex action” ([25], p. 530).
On the other hand, how can universities develop environmental educational materials from
higher education through ICT? Since the 1990s, multimedia has changed the development of education.
It allows the participation of multiple senses, detailed knowledge and even the handling of the contexts
in which it is introduced [ 26]. In this sense, ICT allows students to engage in a new form of teaching
in which they explore knowledge. In non-formal and popular education, auto-guided processes are
important because students contribute to learning materials with their productions.
ICT are powerful pedagogical tools that raise awareness of key sustainability issues, such as
human rights, peace and non-violence, global citizenship, multiculturalism, gender equity, etc. [ 27];
it also relates to the pedagogical treatment of curricular contents that are related to renewable energies,
sustainable economic development, environmental education, etc. [28].
The pesticides project brings awareness and the production of knowledge through ICT through
processes that have been promoted by educational institutions (high school and college) to the
population in general, as well as in the process of dialogue with the community, which is a producer,
and makes decisions about the materials and contents that are distributed. Higher education centers
work as supporters. In regard to the development of the ﬁrst contents and educational proposals,
the challenge is to integrate different aspects (from ideation to production), with participatory planning.
Some authors point out the importance of adapting materials and facilitation mechanisms,
as well as the promotion of key aspects such as trust, creativity, and transparency to generate full
participatory and collaborative spaces [ 29]. The pedagogical proposal of the integration of materials in
public pedagogy generates new channels for each partner, population, higher education institutions,
and workers. This kind of project can integrate the social needs and concerns in their design and
communication dynamics if, at the beginning of a co-creation process, it transparently fosters the
conﬁdence of the actors in the process mentioned. Opening the preliminary decision mechanisms to
an investigation is valued by the participants as an important aspect for a successful integration ([ 29],
p. 37). The population takes advantage of the channels to denunciate conﬂicting situations. These
denunciations take place in spaces that have been generated as platforms [ 28–30], or used by the
different actors. They become meeting places. This is possible because technological “low intensity”
tools are used, in which a good part of the population has acquired competence such as taking a photo
or recording a video and sharing it [ 28]. While new media technologies allow individuals to save
unprecedented space for an alternative, similar to counter-hegemonic politics, they also face the
risks of responding to established social constitutions in the tentacles of the dominant culture and
ideology. Emancipatory, politically progressive, and socially transformative uses of the media and
technology should thus be informed by a critical pedagogy to produce a viable counter-hegemonic
cultural politics and pedagogy of the internet. This requires insight into the important role of narrative
in pedagogy ([31], p. 6).
All actors, from schools to social entities and universities, participate by echoing and returning
contents to the population as a whole. The traditionally unrepresented people can acquire their own
voices in the politics of representations as the prerequisite of critical human agency for further social
emancipation [ 31]. Schools generate their own materials through the result of research processes in the
classroom. The project is based on the idea that environmental problems are a valuable resource for
the generation of signiﬁcant learning. This signiﬁcant learning would allow the connection of different
knowledge from different disciplines (research methodology, natural sciences, and technology),Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 6 of 12
the building of bridges between the knowledge and previous experiences lived by the students,
and the possibility of transferring this knowledge to the community or local environment.
This way, ICT is thought of as a means that could foster the transformations of practices, knowledge,
and social representations. For example, “posting and responding to videos in UT (YouTube) are
fundamentally self-realizing activities of UTers because they invest their time and energy in thinking over
topics, organizing ideas, and producing videos. Through the video production process, UTers practice
a crucial pedagogy of critical human agency, becoming a subject in Freire’s point of view. The oppressed
traditionally are deprived of the means of expressing themselves, and self-expression on UT is consistent
with the emphasis in Wollstonecraft, Toni Morrison, and Freire for [the] self-empowerment of the
oppressed. Hence, in the society of multimediated and media culture, UT can provide individuals with
significant opportunities to intervene in media cultural politics” ([28], p. 27).
Higher education institutions generate materials, such as micro-videos and infographics, which
allow a quick overview of speciﬁc and social aspects of the pesticide problem. This way, problems
addressed as curricular contents allow the use of authentic situations and articulation with students’
interests. In this way, they become functional instruments in people’s lives. Bringing the student
closer to the birth of environmental problems links him even more to his immediate surroundings.
It provides tools that allow them to build an environmental ethic to understand that nature, although
limited, it is of inestimable value. It implies that man must think and rethink the quality of his relations
with the environment [28].
Other participating groups are the workers. They receive synthetic information on safety standards
at work. As it was said before, informal channels and massive online courses (MOOC) that are linked to
professional training will be open.
The problem arose of how to implement a participatory design and ﬁnd channels to connect
stakeholders and share information. Conditions to launch a project of public pedagogy with ICT
must appear.
2. Materials and Methods
The purpose of the study that has been undertaken was to analyze the viability of the participatory
production processes of popular education on pesticides, with the participation of various agents
(universities, farmers, schools, families, and environmental agencies). Some questions to answer
include: how could it be possible to gain spontaneous knowledge about pesticide uses in Goi ás? How
can ordinary people be involved in this process? What channel must be implemented to undertake
popular education? What agents take part in this? In this very difﬁcult issue, are agents that are
involved open to sharing knowledge about pesticides? How are agents interacting in this process?
Could it be a participatory process? Are people ready to participate?
This is qualitative research. Popular education is possible with media. In this study, knowledge is
linked to people who use the media and to the places where it was picked. Qualitative research works
with texts. These texts could be part of a new theory to understand what happened in a singular place and
time. Knowledge is built by the intersubjectivation of interviews and transcriptions. The triangulation of
data and researchers [32,33] is needed in this study.
Questions of study are related, as said previously, to establish goals on the popular education
initiative on pesticides, as well as establish criteria for materials, uses, and needs in a participatory
way with ICT.
A previous study that is not included in this paper demonstrated the worrying uses of pesticides
by the people of Goi ás.
In our study, some interviews were conducted. Interviews were the main technique. People are
disseminated in various places, and interviews were a way to connect with them in their own farms.
On the other hand, in-depth interviews are necessary because not many people able to talk about
pesticides. It is a controversial issue. In addition, it is necessary to connect with people with differentSustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 7 of 12
points of view, and are open to changing the conventional pro-pesticide wisdom. Ordinary people,
farmers, local authorities, minorities, teachers . . . They were included in the process.
This study features ﬁve in-depth interviews with key people from the region. These include
a counselor from an environmental research center in a national park in Goi ás, a pesticide activist,
a producer that lost her harvest, and a member of a “quilombo” or “kalunga” community. The pesticide
activist works as a counselor in the district, a rural tourist agent, and a farmer. We also wanted to
include a teacher, but it was not possible for the agenda. A mother informed us about what the teachers
of local school were saying about pesticides.
Participants were chosen as key informants. Key information is related to the different audiences
or consumers of information, the places where they are living, and the channels that they use. Selection
was in a cascade process that started with the counselor. Selected quotes and an analysis of interviews
are presented below.
The methodology is developed with a participatory research process [ 29]. It included a Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analysis developed with the participants (http://www.
redcimas.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/manual_2010.pdf).
To promote participation, different meetings were held about what the participants knew about
pesticides and the possibilities of promoting them as collective (university, secondary school, social
entity) knowledge dissemination processes, and dialogue with both the community and the rest of
the population.
An in-depth interview script was prepared for those who are responsible for the entities that were
invited to be in this participatory design. The interviews were carried out in February 2018.
The script is adapted to different parts of popular education. It asks about the starting points of
institutions: links with the community, materials produced, and projects carried out by the university in
relation to diseases caused by contact with pesticides. Schools and teachers were interviewed about their
relationship with the community, the environmental projects that had been carried out at schools, and
their experience with pesticides. Finally, they were asked about the socio-demographic, occupational,
and leisure characteristics of the workers’ life, the possibilities of using ICT, and their experience with
pesticides. With this structure, successive debates were established with different contestants.
In addition, it was useful to analyze interviews about the uses of pesticides in a current study
promoted by a Brazilian network that was linked to one of the participants of this study. Thus, this
study includes different Brazilian states that are strong producers of vegetables.
Our study generates a starting process of self-reﬂection and self-criticism. The interviews with
the different actors generate trust, and open up genuine participation.
An analysis of transcriptions show some of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
of solutions to starting popular education. In this way, it was labeled, and a report was built that
shared with informants and the team.
The exhaustive description of the problem and many different participants should help to generate
a conceptual transferability [ 33]. Nevertheless, the external validity of qualitative methodology is
limited. At least four factors that limit the external validity are identiﬁed in this study. First, there
are few interviews, although they are very relevant. Another way to develop the study could have
been generating grounded theory. Second, the study occurs within a speciﬁc context. This problem
could have been minimized by conducting studies in several agricultural regions of the country. Third,
the study is developed for a limited time, although it is a constant in assessment and case studies to
adapt to the conditions of what can be done, using resources, possibilities, and the time available with
rigor. To ﬁnish, there may be a researcher over-implication problem. It has sought to compensate with
a participatory process.
Information will be published in the following site, https://sites.google.com/site/agrotoxicossalud/
(in Spanish and Portuguese).Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 8 of 12
3. Results
The main results collected in the interviews are shown below in a SWOT analysis to decide how
to start a participative process with ICT around pesticides and popular education. Institutions of
higher education (an environmental counselor from a research center in the park, and the background
of research of higher education institutions), farmers (a producer that lost her harvest and a pesticide
activist), minority communities (a member of a “quilombo” or “kalunga” community), local authorities
(a counselor), and educators (with the testimony of others) take different positions in the interviews
that were conducted.
3.1. Strengths
All of the interviewed people agreed about the opportunity to talk about the problem of pesticides,
because it affects people every day.
They also agreed about agribusiness as a reality in the center–east of Brazil. All of the involved
parties wanted to think about solutions that lessen the effects of pesticides. One way could be getting
into economic strategies. Then, the messages in a popular education strategy could promote the cut
of expenses. They should offer directions to participatory strategy in order to convince them, and
not collide.
Many people are concerned about pesticides. Higher education institutions have developed
different actions over the last ﬁve years to promote environmental education. They have an
environmental center that is maintained by a federal university, which performs different actions.
They are involved in teaching undergraduate and master’s subjects in this area, hold workshops, and
participant in research in the territory.
In addition, higher education institutions explore the situations of farmers in various rural regions
in Goi ás in order to understand the effects of pesticides in their daily lives. They made contact with
local agents and with the population to understand their feelings and problems. That offers a good
network to try to propose solutions to start a participatory process.
Different activities that are linked to environmental education are undertaken from higher
education institutions. These include popular education for the dissemination of science, oral histories
about rural women, didactic materials (booklets), gymkhana waste collection activities, and more.
These actions could attract people to other actions in ICT channels.
The didactic activities that were undertaken by the environmental counselor allowed generating
alternative activities in the district, such as for example, the beginning of a market for organic farming
products. There are small owners who hold weekly meetings in this market. This initiative allows, on
the one hand, the existence of a collective connection, and on the other hand, people become open to
new initiatives, such as the participatory process with ICT. It could be a space to share some of the
materials, such as brochures and QR codes.
3.2. Weaknesses
The groups involved have different degrees of commitment to actions to raise awareness about
the effects of pesticides. Some cannot have much commitment because they are isolated, either by
political action or by marginality. For example, the environmental counselor informed us about the
workers of big producers. They have a union, but it does not help them. They do not know if they have
a health ofﬁcer who protects the workers from handling pesticides. On the other hand, the “quilombo”
or “kalunga” community is far from being linked to participatory process. It is necessary to engage
some local supporters.
Another problem is the exhaustion of previous strategies that do not presage success for the new
ones. The environmental counselor is desperate with the advance of the southern farmers and the
disasters that they promote. He intends to stop them with political actions. The didactic activitiesSustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 9 of 12
undertaken by the environmental counselor have been abandoned. He is not supportive to the
implementation of popular education initiatives.
3.3. Opportunities
Media and places for sharing are important. As the population has smartphones, this is one
way to start a participatory project. Environmental actions are being taken, and they have allowed
a channel to be opened through WhatsApp , through which information circulates. This could be an
initial way of sharing messages.
In the region of Chapada dos Veadeiros and around IFG-An ápolis, there are young community
leaders who are part of the research processes. These leaders were willing to encourage people’s
participation in social media.
There are some social places where information is shared, such as a church of the main town of
the district, on Sundays. Nevertheless, the goals to be shared are also important. The environmental
counselor, the institutions of higher education, and the counselor are convinced that they must unite
their strategies.
It involves all of the partners. The local school is concerned with environmental education, so they
inform the environmental counselor. Colleagues from higher education institutions repeat the same
about the past interviews held. Secondary schools undertake environmental projects; they make
some videos and some podcasts, but then they do not continue. Now, in contrast, the school asks for
larger workshops. A video workshop with young people is proposed; then, a video channel on the
internet and a video and photography festival follow. This could be a way of engaging, analyzing, and
denouncing the problems with ICT.
An Edutec Network—Water and Agrochemicals, with partnership with a member from the research
team, includes a proposal to strengthen water research that involves topics of agriculture and the use of
innovative technologies for the removal of pesticides and knowledge formation in communities, and
aims to promote the well-being of the population and the protection of the environment. This network is
important for linking universities and the representatives of the Secretariats of Environment and Health
of the Federal District, in addition to other centers engaged in water research in the region. This network
includes chemists, physicists, biologists, doctors, pharmacists, and other specialists, adding efforts to
create a team with an interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary character.
The availability of information can be a key aspect. There are several federal, state, and local agents
that collect information about the state of the park, although they do not share it. Higher education
institutions have assembled a multidisciplinary team to get information in real time that can be given
to farmers through ICT. Local studies could convince landowners. Pollution detectors in the waters
and aerial photography can also be useful to the local authorities. In addition, micro-videos could be
helpful. A local agreement exists to make the epidemiology of the district public. This information can
be used to reduce the use of pesticides and make it necessary to disclose them. This way, it is possible to
have a platform for the dissemination of data, and the applications of smartphones can be used in the
dissemination of videos developed by young students from Spain and Brazil.
All of the partners of the project are open to share their materials. Materials from the environmental
center could be used in new formats.
Actions in marginal communities need special developments. For example, the “quilombo”
community is focused on the tourist exploitation of the territory. Its agriculture is for subsistence.
They are worried about the progress of the big farmers. They are aware of their threat to both the
territory and tourism. They can be a help of enormous interest for generating messages of environment
conservation and of the rational use of pesticides.
3.4. Threats
The most fertile area of Brazil does not offer new spaces for agricultural exploitation. Farmers in
the south buy land from the “Cerrado”, which is a sub-tropical plateau in the center–east of the country,Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 10 of 12
with a regime of rains and rivers that make it suitable for cultivation. The soil is broken to introduce
intensive soybean plantations. These plantations rotate with others, including corn. This movement
of farmers generates various problems. For the environmental counselor, it threatens the life of the
park. It is a process of transformation for the environment. For the local environmental activist, these
farmers do not respect the permits obtained for cultivation, and destroy natural areas that protect
aquifers. The problem of complaints of environmental crimes covers the size of the entire territory, as
do the difﬁculties of the administration to enforce the law. New actions, as popular education, could
be threatened by important interests in the area.
The aims of the project could be misunderstood by the target audiences. Interviews with higher
education institutions show difﬁculties concerning the perception of the effects of pesticides on
producers and workers in Goi ás. Although the territory is near a national park and a biosphere
reserve, intensive agriculture around the park destroys aquifers, as said before. There are incidents
of water intoxication, but even small farmers do not associate the intensive use of pesticides with
these situations.
The lack of information is a very common case. It could be possible to understand that not to use
pesticides is the cause of pest suffering. For the farmer who lost her harvest, the bad use of pesticides in
their neighborhood is not what caused the plague. It could be the result of mixing different pesticides,
which subsequently disabled their effect against pests. They noticed similar situations in other states
of Brazil.
The project depends on the strength of the partners. Important local supporters of a participatory
strategy, as an environmental center, depend on external support. Its actions operate with some
precariousness. They have a vehicle, but they depend on a project to pay for the fuel. They have
a place, but they are not given permission to make it into an accommodation for other researchers.
4. Conclusions
A participatory process has been generated in which the different entities involved have different
expectations, anxiety, fears, and misgivings. In any case, all of the participating entities have positively
valued the participatory process that has been generated. It has been an opportunity for higher
education institutions to participate in the construction of critical and empowered consciences.
In the development of the project, the conditions in which the theme of the project is lived and
worked by the different actors that were called upon have been highlighted. In addition, it has been
an occasion to highlight the difﬁculties that each actor has in order to reach other groups in the debate
of ideas about how a social problem affects us.
Tensions have emerged between local languages and knowledge, citizen participation, and the
preparations for the construction of contents and valuable resources for the collectives. There have also
been tensions between the degree of freedom among the participants when making proposals, and the
consensus with other agents to improve the products, as well as the interaction with the citizens.
Since the study was carried out on an ongoing and living project, only a few conclusions can be
drawn. On the one hand, the difﬁculties with start a participatory process have been observed, and on
the other hand, the possibilities for a public pedagogy that manages the citizenship and diverse agents
arranged among themselves was also observed.
Among the difﬁculties, it is worth highlighting the socio-political context of Brazil, where the
actions of protest are identiﬁed with leftist positions, at a time when politics has fractured the country.
There are problems regarding the construction of knowledge by different agents, such as, for example,
a certain distrust of schools about the role that the university wants to have.
Besides all of that, different conceptions of popular education appear to be handled by the different
participating agents; with such an issue in discussion, the actions that could be started are paralyzed
until some aspects are clariﬁed. Even so, the possible actions to initiate are still on for the group work
that begins between researchers and the students of the countries.Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 11 of 12
In advance, it could be possible to establish goals regarding the popular education initiative
on pesticides. The popular education strategy should promote cutting the expenses of farmers and
the importance of having local information to act as farm worker, more than the perils of pesticides.
In addition, criteria for materials could be established. It could also be possible to use the material
contents from the environmental center of the region. Brochures and QR codes could be shared in
meeting places such as farmers’ markets. However, more important, short ﬁlms developed by teachers,
parents, and students at schools could be shared in social networks. Overall, the dissemination of
information regarding pesticides is a cheap, participatory, engaging, massive, local, optimistic, and
sustainable product.
Author Contributions: J.P .-L., I.-M.S. and A.O.: context, method, results, analysis, conclusions.
Acknowledgments: We state that we do not receive funds for covering the costs to publish it in open access.
Conﬂicts of Interest: Nobody had role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of
data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Galt, R. Beyond the cycle of poison: Significant shifts in the global pesticides complex 1976–2008. Glob. Environ. Chang.
2008 ,18, 786–799. [CrossRef]
2. Thomas, I. Pedagogy for Education for Sustainability in Higher Education. Sustainability 2014 ,6, 1705–1708.
[CrossRef]
3. Brundiers, K.; Wiek, A.; Kay, B. The Role of Transacademic Interface Managers in Transformational
Sustainability Research and Education. Sustainability 2013 ,5, 4614–4636. [CrossRef]
4. McLaren, P . This Fist Called My Heart: Public Pedagogy in the Belly of the Beast. Antipode 2008 ,40, 472–481.
[CrossRef]
5. Eco, U. Apocalypse Postponed ; Indiana University Press: Bloomington, IN, USA, 2000; ISBN 97808517041804.
6. Eisner, E.; Barone, T. Arts Based Research ; Sage: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2012; ISBN 9781412982474.
7. Bruce, B.; Peterson Bishop, A.; Budhathoki, N. (Eds.) Youth Community Inquiry: New Media for Community and
Personal Growth ; Peter Lang: New York, NY, USA, 2014; ISBN 9781433124037.
8. Andén-Papadopoulos, K. Citizen camera witnessing: Embodied political dissent in the age of mediated
mass self-communication. New Media Soc. 2014 ,16, 753–769. [CrossRef]
9. Martinez-Vivot, M.; Folgueiras Bertomeu, P . Participatory Evaluation, Service-Learning and University.
Profesorado 2015 ,19, 128–143.
10. Imen, P . T rabajo Docente: Debates Sobre Autonom ía Laboral y Democratizaci ón de la Cultura. Pol íticas Educativas y T rabajo
Docente: Nuevas Regularidades, ¿Nuevos Sujetos? Noveduc: Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2006; ISBN 978-987-1808-67-0.
11. Eyler, J. Reﬂection: Linking service and learning-linling students and communities. J. Soc. Issues 2002 ,58,
517–534. [CrossRef]
12. Goldberg, L.; Coufal, K. Reﬂections on service-learning. Critical thinking and cultural competence. J. Coll.
Teach. Learn. 2009 ,6, 39–50. [CrossRef]
13. Clover, D.; Follen, S.; Budd, L. The Nature of Transformation: Environmental Adult Education ; Ontario Institute
for Studies in Education: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2000.
14. Friedmann, J. Empowerment: The Politics of the Alternative Developmen ; Blackwell: Cambridge, UK, 1992.
15. Guimar ães, M. Educaç ão ambiental cr ítica. In Identidades da Educaç ão Ambiental Brasileira ; MMA, Secretaria
Executiva, Diretoria de Educaç ão Ambiental, Eds.; MMA: Bras ília, Brazil, 2004; ISBN 85-87166-67-0.
16. Leff, E. Epistemologia Ambiental , 3rd ed.; Cortez: Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2002; ISBN 85-249-0768-1-1.
17. Foladori, G. Limites do Desenvolvimento Sustent ável; Unicamp: Campinas, Brazil, 2001; ISBN 8526805339.
18. Dias, G.F. Educaç ão Ambiental: Princ ípios e Pr áticas, 3rd ed.; Gaia: Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1994; ISBN 978-8585351090.
19. Oliveira, A.S. Os Dilemas Socioambientais no Entorno do Parque Nacional da Chapada dos Veadeiros: Uma An álise
pela Perspectiva Cr ítica da Educaç ão Ambiental ; Programa de P ós-Graduaç ão em Ci ências Ambientais: Goi ânia,
Brazil, 2016.
20. Rich, R. Citizen Participation and Empowerment. Am. J. Community Psychol. 1995 ,23, 657–676. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]Sustainability 2018 ,10, 3377 12 of 12
21. Lima, G.F.C. Educaç ão ambiental cr ítica: Do socioambientalismo às sociedades sustent áveis. Educ. Pesqui.
2009 ,35, 145–163. [CrossRef]
22. Saito, C.H. Educaç ão ambiental, investigaç ão-ação e empowerment: Estudo de caso. Rev. Linhas Cr ít.2000 ,7,
31–44.
23. Romero Uzc átegui, Y. La salud. Un derecho humano por construir desde la educaci ón.Educere 2014 ,18,
399–408.
24. Tovar-G álvez, J. Pedagog ía ambiental y did áctica ambiental: Tendencias en la educaci ón superior. Rev. Bras. Educ.
2017 ,22, 519–538. [CrossRef]
25. Paredes, J. Teacher training in educational technology: A place to reﬂect about online pedagogies. Relatec
2016 ,15, 143–153.
26. Mayer, R.E. Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educ. Psychol. 1997 ,32, 1–19. [CrossRef]
27. Scott, R. Education for Sustainability through a Photography Competition. Sustainability 2014 ,6, 474–486.
[CrossRef]
28. Senabre, E.; Ferran-Ferrer, N.; Perell ó, J. Diseño participativo de experimentos de ciencia ciudadana. Comunicar
2018 ,54, 29–38. [CrossRef]
29. Anttiroiko, A.V . City-as-a-Platform: The Rise of Participatory Innovation Platforms in Finnish Cities. Sustainability
2016 ,8, 922. [CrossRef]
30. Kellner, D.; Kim, G. YouTube, Critical Pedagogy, and Media Activism. Rev. Educ. Pedagog. Cult. Stud. 2010 ,
32, 3–36. [CrossRef]
31. Iacob, M. Environmental education. Policy and practice. Regae-Rev. Gestiao Aval. Educ. 2013 ,2, 63–71.
32. Babbie, E. The Practice of Social Research ; Belmont: Wadsworth, OH, USA, 2013; ISBN 9781133050094.
33. Flick, U. An Introduction to Qualitative Research ; Sage: London, UK, 2009; ISBN 9781847873231.
©2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).