 
 Digital Development  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Digital Development (formerly Development Informatics) working paper series 
discusses the broad issues surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, 
information systems, and information and communication technologies in the 
process of socio -economic development  
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 8 9 
 
Strengthening the Skills 
Pipeline for Statistical 
Capacity Dev elopment to 
Meet the Demands of 
Sustainable Development: 
Implementing  a Data 
Fellowship Model in Colombia  
 
PETE JONES, JACKIE CARTER, JACO RENKEN  
& MAGDALEN A ARBELÁEZ TOBÓN  
 
 
2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publishe r: Centre for Digital Development  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdd@manchester.ac.uk         Web: https://www.cdd.manchester.ac.uk/  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/    
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Statistical  Capacity Building and the SDGs  ................................ ................  3 
B1. BACKGROUND : THE SDG S AND THEIR STATISTICAL IMPLICATIONS  ................................ .......  3 
B2. STATISTICAL CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT  ................................ ................................ ...........  4 
B3. PARTNERSHIPS FOR BUILDING STATISTICAL CAPACITIES  ................................ .....................  6 
B4. SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  7 
C. A Data Fellowship Model for Building Statistical and Data Literacies  .........  7 
C1. STATISTICAL LITERACY AND DATA LITERACY  ................................ ................................ .... 7 
C2. DATA FELLOWSHIPS AND THE VALUE OF EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING  ................................ .......  9 
D. Practical Steps for Implementing Data Fellowships for the SDGs  .............  11 
D1.  THE NEED FOR COUNTRY -LED INTERVENTIONS  ................................ .............................  11 
D2.  FUTURE IN-COUNTRY RESEARCH IN COLOMBIA  ................................ .............................  12 
E. Conclusions  ................................ ................................ .............................  15 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
1 
 Strengthening the Skills Pipeline for 
Statistical Capacity Dev elopment to Meet 
the Demands of Sustainable Development: 
Implementing  a Data Fellowship Model in 
Colombia  
 
 
Pete Jones1, Jackie Carter1, Jaco Renken2 & Magdalena Arbeláez Tobón3 
1Department of Social Statistics, University of Manchester, UK  
2Centre for Digital Development, University of Manchester, UK  
3Data -Pop Alliance  
 
2021 
 
 
Abstract  
 
The UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) create a global need to deliver on an agenda 
which relies heavily on quantitative data. This creates a demand for human capital with the 
requisite statistical and data skills to work on the challenges represented  by the SDGs. 
Increasingly, long -term domestic solutions to the building of statistical capacities are being 
sought, in order to decrease the dependency on external support and ensure a sustainable 
flow of qualified professionals.  
 
In this paper we argue fo r the value of thinking of statistical capacity as a pipeline which 
needs to begin in the education system, and illustrate how investment in this end of the 
pipeline can deliver a more sustainable and long -term pathway to building up the holistic 
skills -base to enable the challenges of the SDGs to be tackled. We describe a n existing  tried -
and-tested experiential learning model called Q -Step based on developing skills in the 
workplace, and propose that the successes of this partnership -driven model illustrat e how 
‘data fellowships’ can fulfil some of the unmet capacity needs of the data revolution for 
sustainable development . 
 
We illustrate our argument through a practical exploration of the development of such a 
learning model in Colombia. Although there are challenges in ensuring that educational 
access is equal, we demonstrate that there are significant opportunities and a data 
fellowships model opens doors for addressing local skills gaps to help deliver the SDGs.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
The ability to collect, h andle and analyse quantitative data has never been more central to 
civic participation and social progress. The United Nations’ 2030 agenda for sustainable 
development has established the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as the primary 
framework throug h which societal progress is defined globally (UN, 2015). The associated 
Global Indicator Framework, largely the work of statisticians, seeks to measure these goals 
through a host of quantitative indicators, a strategy which places data and statistics at t he 
heart of the international agenda for social, economic and environmental development (UN, 
2020). There is a global ambition to deliver on these goals, yet the majority of countries 
continue to face challenges in their access to a workforce with the requ isite statistical and 
data literacies to meet these demands. In this paper we aim to address the question of 
where these literacies are going to come from by highlighting the role university -based 
education interventions can play.  
 
Our goal is to provide a  critical review of the relevant literature for thinking about how 
statistical education initiatives can contribute to the delivery of the data -oriented agenda of 
the SDGs. We argue that the existing capacity development literature has primarily 
considered  statistical capacity at the level of providing training and support to those 
working in national statistical offices (NSOs). However, we suggest that there are unmet 
needs in this area, and that there is much to be gained from thinking more about capacity  
development in terms of strengthening the pipeline for statistical and data literacies and 
skills. We propose that leveraging the SDGs as an educational tool and building partnerships 
with organisations working on SDG -related social challenges can help to  build engaging, 
incentivised pathways for the development of home -grown statistical literacy. Focusing on 
Colombia , we offer a practical example to illustrate this discussion by exploring the 
opportunities and challenges of adapting an established interns hip-based experiential 
learning model for the development of statistical and data literacy.  This focus on Colombia 
is the result of a partnership between researchers at the University of Manchester and Del 
Rosario  University in Bogotá . Ultimately, we argue  that how the SDGs and the global need 
for quantitative skills can be used to mobilise statistical education is an open question, but 
that there are a number of open doors and opportunities for strengthening the statistical 
capacity pipeline in Colombia  and beyond.  
 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section B, we discuss the connection 
between the SDGs and statistical education programmes in more detail. First, we provide 
some context on the SDGs, their importance, and their statistical imp lications. We then 
review the literature on statistical capacity development in order to highlight the growing 
recognition that more human -centred understandings of statistical capacity are needed to 
address the skills shortages many countries face. In Sec tion C we explore the value of a 
university -based research internship or ‘data fellowship’ model for strengthening the 
statistical and data literacy pipeline in countries. We reflect on the statistical and data 
literacy literature, and the kinds of skills and competencies most needed and coveted for 
working on data -driven approaches to addressing social challenges. We describe an 
effective and proven internship -based model for experiential learning in the UK, and 
highlight how this model taps into many of t he currents and unmet needs outlined in 
Section B. We then open up the discussion to consider how this model can be expanded Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
3 
 outside of the UK, arguing for the need for country -led implementations tailored to the 
particular national and regional needs therein. In Section D we explore the challenges and 
opportunities of developing this model outside of the UK more directly throug h a focus on 
Colombia . We briefly consider the baseline regional capacity, before zooming in on 
Colombia as a case study for evaluating how this kind of statistical education programme 
can achieve the highest impact in that country.  
 
B. Statistical Capacity Buil ding and the SDGs  
 
B1. Background: The SDGs and their Statistical Impli cations  
 
In 2015, the United Nations launched its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (UN, 
2015). The Agenda constitutes a plan for sustainable development which centres on 17  
overarching goals, comprising 169 associated targets and 231 indicators with which to 
measure progress. These goals build on the earlier Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
widely seen to have been well -intentioned but hindered by data gaps, measurabilit y issues, 
and an inattentiveness to the needs and perspectives of global South governments (Attaran, 
2005; Fukuda -Parr and McNeill, 2019; Merry, 2019; OECD, 2015; Yayboke et al, 2017). The 
SDGs eclipse the MDGs in quantity (compare the SDG indicator framew ork’s 231 indicators 
with the MDGs’ 60), breadth and ambition, taking a much more holistic approach to 
sustainable development which applies to all countries and not just those considered low -
income, while acknowledging that the particular path to realisin g them will vary country to 
country (UN, 2015). As such, there is a truly global need and desire to deliver on the SDGs.  
 
This brings significant implications for the statistical education research community, as 
statistics and data skills and competencies are at the heart of the 2030 agenda. In the most 
direct sense, an unprecedented amount of data is required to populate the SDG indicators, 
and this creates new demand for access to individuals with the capacity to collect, handle 
and analyse such data. How ever, there are more indirect ways in which countries need to 
draw on a statistically skilled talent pool in order to deliver on the SDGs. A significant 
number of indicators are classified as “Tier 3”, which means there is no established 
international stan dards or methodology for measuring them. This only increases the burden 
at a national level to identify appropriate data sources and proxies, a task which is 
complicated by the increasing consideration being given to “unofficial” statistics and data, 
eithe r for SDG monitoring specifically or for evidence -based policy and social innovation 
more generally (eg see Lokanathan et al, 2017; MacFeely, 2019; Stuart et al, 2015). These 
new forms of data open up questions of data justice, ownership and privacy (Heeks  and 
Renken, 2018). Thus, in addition to statistical analysis skills, being able to critically evaluate 
the value of quantitative data, as well as understanding the legal and ethical issues which 
such data can present, are skills which are much needed.  
 
Moreover, the effect of the SDGs on the statistical landscape creates the need not only for 
more skills, but also for new skills. The next generation of statisticians and data 
professionals working on SDG problems need not only to possess critical data skill s, but also 
other competencies required to navigate the new landscape. These competencies include 
domain knowledge about sustainability, including understanding of the complex, Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
4 
 interconnected nature of the goals, targets and indicators in the SDG framework  (Barbier 
and Burgess, 2019; Dang and Serajuddin, 2020). In addition, working on the SDGs entails 
multiple levels of analysis (organisational, sectoral, national, regional, global) which 
introduces further analytical complexity and practical challenges. Mo reover, efforts at 
addressing the SDGs involve a diversity of stakeholders, including private organisations, 
governments, civil society, NGOs and multilateral development bodies. A combination of 
analytical, technical, professional and communicative skills  are therefore required in order 
to navigate the multi -disciplinary configurations which often mark work related to delivering 
the SDGs. This combination of factors implies a workforce which is equipped not only with a 
strong textbook understanding of stat istics, but also the ability to engage with the fluidity 
and complexity of real -world research contexts by drawing on a hybrid skillset of 
competencies.  
 
In sum, the SDGs require a steady supply of statistically and data literate social researchers. 
In rea lity, these skills are in short supply in many countries. As such, the UN Independent 
Expert Advisory Group on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development has 
acknowledged that delivering the current agenda requires “a huge increase in the capacity 
of ma ny governments, institutions and individuals” (UN IEAG, 2014: 4), given that national 
statistical systems around the world face significant challenges in the form of limited 
budgets, resources, and access to staff with the required statistical and data lit eracies to 
gather and analyse the relevant data (Fisher and Fukuda -Parr, 2019). What role can statistics 
education programmes play in achieving this necessary increase in capacity?  
 
B2. Statistical Capacity Development  
 
In order to explore how educational interventions can contribute in the space of statistical 
capacity development, we first need to establish that the term statistical capacity refers to 
“the ability of a country’s national statistical system, its organisations and individuals to 
collect, pr oduce, analyse and disseminate high quality and reliable statistics and data to 
meet users’ needs” (PARIS21, 2019: 13). As we argue above, the implications of the SDGs 
mean that this capacity is marked by a hybrid skillset incorporating analytical, technic al and 
professional competencies. Efforts at evaluating and developing statistical capacity are 
primarily coordinated by multilateral organisations  such as the World Bank, the UN 
Statistical Division, and the Partnership in Statistics for Development in th e 21st Century 
(PARIS21), as well as national governmental bodies such as the UK’s Office for National 
Statistics, Statistics Canada and the French INSEE.  
 
There is an increasing recognition in the capacity development literature that efforts at 
building statistical capacity need to be focused not on importing capacities from outside, 
but empowering those in -country in order “to provide the long -term foundati on for 
transformation” (Stafford -Smith et al, 2017: 914). As MacFeely and Barnat put it, “capacity 
building is most effective when it is home -grown, long -term in perspective and managed 
collectively by those who stand to benefit" (MacFeely and Barnat, 2017 : 897). Ensuring that 
there is a supply of statistical and data skills sufficient to meet the demand of the SDGs is a 
critically important pillar in this regard. In order to have home -grown capacities in place for 
statistical measurement and reporting, mor e attention needs to be placed on connecting Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
5 
 the higher -order development outcomes with the earlier stages of the pipeline of a 
statistically and data literate workforce capable of addressing the challenges of the SDGs.  
 
However, statistical capacity is ge nerally evaluated at the level of the national statistical 
system (NSS), without regard for the flow of sufficiently skilled talent into the system.  For 
example, the World Bank’s Statistical Capacity Indicator assessment system evaluates 
nations’ capacity  only in terms of methodology, data sources and periodicity (World Bank, 
n.d.). This effectively frames statistical capacity as the ability to provide data that can fulfil 
international monitoring standards, detaching data from the individuals that use (an d stand 
to benefit from) the data within countries. We see two shortcomings of this perspective on 
statistical capacity which can be addressed through an increased role for higher education. 
Firstly, capacity development is often  thought of as an interacti on between national 
statistical systems and other actors such as NGOs and foreign aid and multilateral 
organisations. Focusing on the NSS without regard for the statistical and data literacy 
pipeline that feeds into it seems to either implicitly assume tha t the relevant capacities will 
be built from outside the system (e.g. by international actors providing training for NSS 
staff), or fail to account for the realities of statistical education in many countries, where 
general statistical competency rates may  be low and very unequally distributed through the 
population (North et al, 2014; Stuart et al, 2015). Such a perspective therefore overlooks the 
role that investment in statistical education interventions can play in strengthening the in -
country pipeline and reducing dependency on external support.  
 
Secondly, data alone will not be sufficient for meeting the challenges of the SDGs, and 
countries require investment in data literacy and skills in order to sustainably improve the 
capacity for effective use a nd understanding of data  (PARIS21, 2015; Stuart et al, 2015) . 
While the benefits of investing in data production, infrastructure and technology are well -
known and understood, there is still comparatively little energy directed towards the need 
to invest in  the individual capabilities necessary to make effective use of these data and 
technologies. In a recent survey of national statistical offices (NSOs) around the world on 
statistical capacity assessment, PARIS21 found that “while only 2% of assessed capabi lities 
target the individual, 32% of countries expressed that individual capabilities need to be 
improved to rise to new data ecosystem challenges” (PARIS21, 2019: 16). Moreover, Keijzer 
and Klingebiel caution against “the production of data and informatio n at the expense of 
statistical capacity” (2017: 10), suggesting that care must be taken to ensure that the short -
term desire to populate the SDG indicators does not divert resources away from the longer -
term development of the overall system capacity (Mac Feely and Barnat, 2017).  
 
Recent advances in the capacity development literature begin to address these 
shortcomings by acknowledging that a more human -centred vision of statistical capacity is 
needed to respond to the current global demands. This is refle cted in the “Capacity 
Development 4.0” (CD4.0) framework recently developed by PARIS21, which aims to “go 
beyond the traditional production -side interventions to also include the strengthening of 
data use, literacy and results” (PARIS21, n.d.). CD4.0 offer s a conceptual refinement of 
statistical capacity in light of the 2030 agenda, which recognises that data alone are 
insufficient to generate the insight and knowledge required to form effective evidence -
based policy, and that more work needs to be done to improve the skills base on which the 
delivery of the SDGs relies.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
6 
  
Thus, raising the level of individual skills is now being made a priority in the statistical 
capacity discourse, with a mixture of professional, technical and analytical skills being 
promo ted. This addresses prior concerns that one of the barriers to the data revolution is 
that there is “too little investment in people and skills” (PARIS21, 2015: 19). By focusing 
more on developing the skills and resources necessary for the effective use of  data, the 
CD4.0 approach acknowledges that both the short -term monitoring requirements and the 
longer -term development goals can be met by promoting in -country skills development.  
On a practical level, CD4.0 remains focused on the national statistical sys tem and, as such, 
does not explicitly consider the role of educational interventions in helping to build the 
statistical capacities it calls for. However, it usefully emblematises the appetite for new ways 
of thinking about statistical capacity, as well as  the clear need for the relevant skills and 
competencies to be built. We argue that connecting the desired outcomes of this capacity 
building perspective with the education system through novel approaches and partnerships 
can help build a stronger, more di rect pipeline for a workforce with the required skills and 
competencies to tackle the SDGs.  
 
B3. Partnerships for Building Statistical Capacities  
 
While much of the focus of statistical capacity building has been on NSOs and the broader 
NSSs, there is grow ing recognition that there is a lot of valuable expertise and data which 
lies outside of these systems. As such, statistical capacity building is increasingly focused on 
the broader “data ecosystem” (PARIS21, 2020), which includes the NSO, the wider NSS, t he 
private sector, academia, civil society and individual citizens. This means not only 
considering non -traditional data sources, but also the vital role of partnerships between 
different sectors to capitalise on the skills and experience that already exis t in countries 
looking to develop their statistical capacity (Oburu and Yoshikawa, 2018). The SDGs often 
cut across traditional realms of expertise and require co -ordination between multiple actors 
within the data ecosystem. As MacFeely and Barnat argue, " availing of new opportunities 
arising from new data sources or meeting the challenges of greater demands for climate 
related data, geo -spatial information, better visualisation or improved explanations will 
require new strategic partnerships, both national ly and internationally in order to get the 
mix of skills and experience necessary" (MacFeely and Barnat, 2017: 898).  
 
In fact, partnerships are represented explicitly by Goal 17 in the SDGs, a broad goal targeted 
at improving the means of implementation o f the SDG framework, which includes capacity 
building and engaging “effective public, public -private and civil society partnerships, building 
on the experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships” (UN, 2020). The UN’s A World 
That Counts  report frame s such partnerships as a key aspect of how the data revolution can 
be achieved, listing among its hopes for the future that “governments, civil society, 
academia and the philanthropic sector work together to raise awareness of publicly 
available data, to s trengthen the data and statistical literacy (“numeracy”) of citizens” (UN, 
2014: 18).  
 
This follows the recognition in the statistical capacity literature that the SDGs require 
building capacities at deeper, more foundational levels in society in order to bring about the 
data revolution for sustainable development (Jütting, 2016; Sachs, 2012 ). Thus, one of the Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
7 
 ways in which the current development agenda can be more sustainable is by increasing the 
role of partnerships with education providers to create stronger pipelines for the skills 
needed to work on the SDGs. As Akinsola and Sharma argue , “as we move towards 2030, 
what is becoming increasingly clear is that traditional approaches to promoting partnerships 
might not be enough to meet the objectives of SDGs. Bilateral partnerships that focus on 
increasing capacity at the grassroots and decr easing dependency on external support need 
to be promoted” (Akinsola and Sharma, 2018: 416). We suggest that, in this way, 
partnerships between higher education institutions and organisations producing or working 
with data related to the SDGs can be levera ged as an effective means for sustainably 
developing statistical capacity. In Section C, we discuss how this can be achieved in more 
detail.  
 
B4. Summary  
 
The SDGs create a global need to deliver on an agenda which relies heavily on quantitative 
data. This  creates a demand for human capital with the requisite statistical and data skills to 
work on the challenges represented by the SDGs. However, the dominant paradigm of 
statistical capacity development is focused on the national statistical office, includin g the 
training of the staff therein by external actors.  Increasingly, more home -grown and long -
term solutions to the building of statistical capacities are being sought, in order to decrease 
the dependency on external support and ensure a sustainable flow of qualified labour from 
the grassroots level. This shift to a more human -centred and holistic vision of statistical 
capacity, along with an increased recognition of the value of cross -sector partnerships for 
building statistical capacity, opens doors for novel statistical education initiatives to play a 
role in strengthening the pipeline for statistical capacities. In the next section, we suggest 
and discuss an experiential learning -based intervention which offers a promising model for 
achieving impact in this area.  
 
C. A Data  Fellowship Mo del for Building Stati stical and Data 
Literac ies 
 
C1. Statistical  Literacy and Data Liter acy 
 
Before proceeding further, it is worth clarifying how we are using the terms “statistical 
literacy” and “data literacy” here, in order to establish the kinds of skills that are most 
important for an educational intervention that can address the unmet needs  discussed in 
Section B. In the education community, questions of data provenance and handling have 
typically been considered components of “data literacy”, while the more analytical and 
conceptual questions of quantitative analysis of data have been consi dered under 
“statistical literacy” (e .g. Schield, 2004). From this perspective, we can understand statistical 
literacy  as a combination of needs and competencies comprising “the ability to produce, 
analyse and summarise detailed statistics in surveys and s tudies” and “the ability to read 
and interpret summary statistics in the everyday media: in graphs, tables, statements and 
essays” (Schield, 2010: 135), and data literacy  as a broader “ability to collect, manage, 
evaluate, and apply data, in a critical man ner” (Ridsdale et al, 2015). Separating out these 
literacies assists us in considerations of the way in which these could be addressed in the Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
8 
 curriculum, either in the school or university classroom, or through training in the 
workplace.  
 
However, the dem ands of the data revolution and the rise of more holistic data science 
approaches to statistical research have begun to erode the boundaries between the two, 
along with distinctions between the needs of producers and users of data. Statistical literacy 
scholarship increasingly recognises that "as forms of communication and ways of presenting 
and receiving data change so too does what it takes for someone to be statistically literate" 
(Wild, 2017: 31). The critical data skills that are typically thought of a s comprising data 
literacy are now being argued to be necessary parts of the statistical curriculum (Gould, 
2017). The current age of big data, open data and new forms of data requires a more holistic 
skill set which includes and goes beyond understanding the basic formulas, principles and 
analytical aspects of statistical reasoning. In order to both leverage the power and 
understand the limits of the varied data sources which now permeate our world, a kind of 
literacy is needed which includes “a critical a ppreciation of data provenance and quality” 
(Ridgway et al, 2013), “understanding issues of data privacy and ownership” (Gould, 2017), 
and “understanding how data are stored” (ibid.). These skills are in addition to, rather than 
instead  of conventional sta tistical literacy skills.  
 
The conceptual, mechanical and critical aspects of doing statistics with real data are all 
important elements of the skillset required to work on understanding and addressing social 
challenges such as those represented by the SDG s (Engel, 2017; Gould, 2017; Prodromou 
and Dunne, 2017).  Critical data skills are important as, unlike textbook data, “real data 
about society are often more complex and messy” (Engel, 2017: 46). If learners are to use 
their statistical skills to work on S DG problems, they need to be prepared to work with such 
real-world data and develop the various data literacy requirements that this entails. This is 
particularly important for ensuring that data sources which fall outside the traditional 
sphere of officia l statistics are adequately understood when these are utilised towards the 
SDGs. Likewise, the ability to draw insights from such data also requires statistical literacy: 
the social problems represented by the SDGs are highly complex, and understanding the m 
therefore “requires the ability to explore, understand, and reason about complex 
multivariate data, because social phenomena do not happen in a vacuum, and their 
understanding requires awareness of how variables co -vary, or affect each other, or are 
situated in a network of causal factors that may change over time in manifold ways” (Engel, 
2017: 45).  
 
The recognition of the need for both sets of competencies does not mean that the 
distinction should be dispensed with altogether, or that it is appropriate to assume that the 
terms may be used interchangeably. By referring only to “data literacy”, one may implicitly 
centre the tools and perspectives of data science at the expense of the important principles 
of statistical reasoning that remain central in stat istics education. Similarly, referring only to 
“statistical literacy” may privilege the analytical dimension of working with data at the 
expense of the critical and practical aspects which frequently define such work outside of 
the classroom. We do not aim  (nor claim) to reconcile these definitional issues in this paper. 
For these reasons, we generally refer to “statistical and data literacies”, as this collapsing of 
the two effectively captures that hybridity  is at the core of how quantitative education 
curricula can contribute to the unmet needs of the data revolution. Moreover, as our Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
9 
 proposed model is premised on the application of statistics in the workplace, we regard the 
need to have the full set of data and statistical literacies to provide an inclus ive set of skills 
which will have most benefit in strengthening the skills pipeline nationally.  
 
In the following section, we set out how an experiential learning model can help to capture 
the value of a hybrid approach by giving learners hands -on experien ce with real data in 
addition to classroom -based learning.  
 
C2. Data Fellowships and the Value of Experiential Lear ning  
 
The model we propose is designed to build on the success of an established model from the 
UK called Q -Step (see Carter et al, 2017). Q -Step was a national educational step -change 
programme developed as a strategic response to the shortage of quantitatively -skilled social 
science graduates in the United Kingdom (Nuffield, 2014). The programme funded 15 Q -
Step Centres within higher educatio n institutions. As an experimental programme, centres 
were encouraged to trial and evaluate different approaches to training undergraduates in 
statistics and data analysis. The University of Manchester Q -Step Centre, with many 
successful partnerships alrea dy established with industry, developed a paid internship 
programme which placed 250 undergraduates since 2013 in organisations including local 
and national government, charities, statistical institutes and research consultancies. 
Students spent two months  working on real quantitative data -driven projects that could 
help them to practice and develop their professional and analytical skills. The data -driven 
research projects, which were co -designed by the host organisation, had to matter and have 
relevance t o the host. Although not formally assessed as part of the student’s 
undergraduate degree, the interns were required to develop a poster at the end of their 
placement.  A half -day conference was then held to provide an opportunity to celebrate the 
placement  learning, with prizes being awarded for talks and posters, the external judges 
panel comprising practitioners, academics and former interns. The intention was to share 
the value of the experiential learning opportunities, and to make visible the analytica l and 
professional learning that took place. Many of these internships resulted in graduate job 
offers, and even more led to valuable connections between the partner organisations and 
the university.  
 
The value of the Q -Step paid internship model is that it exposes students not only to 
classroom -based instruction in the basic statistical principles and analytical techniques 
which underpin statistical literacy, but also hands -on experience working with real data. 
Students participating in the programme firs t receive intensive training in the classroom to 
develop their statistical and data literacy skills, before moving to the workplace where they 
undertake real quantitative data -driven projects. In these research internships, students are 
able to practice an d develop the skills learned in the classroom while building the 
accompanying professional and analytical skills that are necessary for working with and 
communicating about data. These placements provide a win -win scenario, where partner 
organisations rece ive an extra pair of hands to work on a short -term project of value to 
them, while the student gets to hone and develop their skills doing research that matters. 
Whilst we named these ‘internships’, they form the basis of the data fellows programme 
that we  propose here.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
10 
 The data fellowship model is an example of experiential learning, a pedagogical approach 
rooted in the theory of Kolb (1984), of which “a key part is personal hands -on practical 
experience in the learning process” (Purdam, 2016: 258). Expe riential modes of learning 
such as internships, study away programmes and project -based learning are “proving to be 
critical and powerful in the overall quality and meaning of the undergraduate experience” 
(Bass, 2012: 24), with growing evidence that there  are material benefits to both learners 
and educators (Roberts, 2018). This is particularly important for the teaching of quantitative 
skills to social science students, where there is a growing recognition that “the learning of 
social science research ski lls should be closer to the reality of social science research in 
practice” (Purdam, 2016: 266). This means getting students to practice and develop the 
hybrid set of data and statistical literacies required through hands -on experience with real 
data and r eal research problems.  
 
This experiential learning can help to bridge the gap between the formulae learned and the 
conceptual understandings underpinning them by putting statistics into the context of front -
line social research. A key challenge for statist ics education is to ensure that students 
develop more than just the ability to recall and apply formulae and calculations from 
textbooks, but also a higher -level understanding of the principles of making sense of data. 
As Gail Burrill observes, “you could go to a class you have of undergraduates and ask them 
what the mean is, and you’re probably going to get an answer like ‘you add them up and 
divide’. So, there’s really not a conceptual foundation. It’s a recipe” (Burrill, 2020).  
This is illustrated by Hob den (2014), who reports on a teacher re -skilling programme in 
South Africa which aimed to provide educators with the quantitative foundations to teach a 
course in Mathematical Literacy. When asked to provide an interpretive explanation of a 
sample sentence  reporting the median survival times for men and women once infected 
with HIV, the trainees displayed generally low levels of conceptual understanding which led 
them to misunderstand the underlying health information being communicated in the 
sentence. Hob den notes that by focusing on a free -text, explanatory task rather than a 
mechanical application of a formula or calculation, the study draws “attention to the chasm 
that exists between the procedural computation of basic statistical measures and the 
conce ptual understanding that enables and informs important opinions” (Hobden, 2014: 
80). This chimes with Chris Wild’s assessment that capacity building in statistical literacy 
ought to prioritise “conceptual understandings that enhance human understanding  of data 
and what data can and cannot do, elements that are empowering  and of lasting value  to 
citizens” (Wild, 2017: 36, emphasis in original). Crucially, the hybrid skillset needed to close 
this gap between procedural knowledge and effective understanding fo r everyday use is 
“unlikely to develop without opportunity to learn through exposure to practice, and this 
seems to be the key” (Hobden, 2014: 81).  
 
We propose that the Q -Step model developed at the University of Manchester can provide a 
valuable interven tion in light of the challenges identified in Section B by helping to develop 
the unmet skills needs and thus contribute to the development of the next generation of 
quantitative social researchers. The approach achieves this in a number of ways. First, th e 
paid internship model incentivises students to take an interest in statistical and data -driven 
approaches to solving social challenges, providing motivation for more students to embark 
on pathways into quantitative careers. Moreover, as the learners are substantively 
interested in complex social phenomena, as social science students, they are able to bring Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
11 
 their new knowledge and understanding back to their studies and use this to direct their 
interests and future career choices. Second, the two -way feedb ack between the partner 
organisations and the educators helps build understanding of which skills are most valued 
and expected by prospective employers working on data -oriented projects. Importantly, this 
includes those professional and communicative skill s which we have argued are particularly 
needed for working on the SDGs. Third, by working with partners in relevant sectors, the 
model capitalises on the already existing skills and data available in -country. This not only 
reduces the dependency on externa l actors for capacity building support, but also ensures 
that learners will be honing their data skills on problems that are relevant to their society.  
With the potential value of this model in mind, we consider in the next section how to apply 
it practica lly in Colombia.  
 
D. Practical Steps for Implementing Data Fello wships for the 
SDGs  
 
D1. The Need for Country -Led Inter ventions  
 
The Q -Step programme offers an encouraging example of how partnerships and workplace 
learning -based interventions can build a pipeline of statistical capacity for quantitative social 
research. In the remainder of this paper we wish to explore in more pract ical terms how this 
model can be developed in other countries to address the unmet needs identified in Section 
B. In doing so, we must first acknowledge that what works in the UK will not necessarily 
work elsewhere, and it is critically important to consid er how the approach might serve the 
needs of a particular country. Both the UN  (2015)  and PARIS21  (2015)  acknowledge that the 
particular social, economic and political environments in each country mean that progress 
towards the SDGs and efforts at statisti cal capacity development must be country -led 
processes. Language, culture, political will, economic factors, and the structure of the 
education system all contribute to determining what kind of implementation is practical and 
likely to have the desired imp act in a given context.  
 
We have argued the importance of partnerships in the process of building the in -country 
capacity pipeline, specifically aimed at supporting the SDG framework. However, 
partnerships is not an end in itself – the development sector is very familiar with tokenistic 
approaches to partnerships and participation potentially leading to the “the unjust and 
illegitimate exercise of power” (Cooke and Kothari, 2001: 1). Partnerships that lead to 
transformative outcomes in the capacity pipelin e require in -country ownership and 
leadership, supplemented by international actors. The role of those trans -national actors 
should revolve around offering technical competence and service, whereas local actors take 
the lead thereby ensuring that the local  context remains central to capacity development 
initiatives.  
 
As such, our argument is not that the Q -Step model can be imported into other countries 
prefabricated. What we are arguing for is the value of countries building on the successes 
and strengths  of this model to tailor an  intervention to the particular unmet needs of that 
country . In practice, this means identifying where opportunities exist, such as determining 
where there is political will to address skills gaps in certain sectors, and working with Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
12 
 universities with expertise in statistical education to develop relevant learning materials. 
However, it also means acknowledging the challenges that may exist in a particular country, 
for example where access to higher education is particularly skewe d, or where the baseline 
of statistical expertise, capacity and infrastructure required for such a programme to be 
impactful is not already in place.   
 
D2. Future  In-Country Res earch in Colombia  
 
To this point we have argued that there are a number of unme t needs in the current 
statistical capacity development landscape, particularly in relation to the SDGs, and that a 
country -led, experiential learning -based data fellowship model can help to address these 
needs. In this section we wish to illustrate this a rgument in more practical terms through a 
discussion of the development of a data fellows programme in Colombia. We focus on 
Colombia as our research on this topic is the result of a partnership between the University 
of Manchester and Data -Pop Alliance, a  research laboratory led by Harvard, MIT and the 
Overseas Development Institute that has worked extensively on data literacy in Latin 
America and maintains a strong network and knowledge base in the region, including in 
Colombia. This facilitates identifyi ng the strengths and weaknesses of the Colombian 
statistical system, as well as the practical opportunities and challenges of implementing the 
kind of model described in Section C. Our analysis in this section is also informed and 
supplemented by pilot res earch we conducted in several Latin America n countries , including 
an initial workshop in São Paulo in May 2019, followed by interviews with a number of key 
actors in the statistical community of three countries (Mexico, Colombia and Brazil), drawn 
from aca demia, civil society and the public sector ( for more details see Higgins et al, 2019).  
This pilot research led to a partnership with colleagues at Universidad Del Rosario in Bogotá, 
who will lead the development of a data fellowships programme  in Colombia . Here, we 
report some of the emerging challenges and opportunities that will shape this development.  
First, we focus on Colombia’s statistical and data capacity for the SDGs, before turning to 
the Colombian pipeline for developing statistical and data literacies.  
 
Statistical and Data Capac ity for the SDGs  
 
One of the strengths of the Colombian statistical system for developing a data fellowships 
programme is that Colombia is one of several countries in the region that already have well -
establi shed and resourced national statistical and academic systems, which allows more 
runway for getting a programme of the nature we describe up and running. The national 
statistical office is relatively well -resourced and developed by international standards. For 
example, Colombia scores well on the World Bank’s Statistical Capacity Index, remaining 
well above the regional average as well as the average for middle -income countries over the 
last 15 years (World Bank, 2020). Moreover, with specific regard to the SDGs, interviewees 
described Colombia as an example in the region for taking the lead on the development of 
country indicators for measuring progress against Tier 2 and Tier 3 indicators (those where 
established methodologies and international standards ei ther do not exist or are not widely 
used) (Higgins et al, 2019).  
 
However, while statistical and data capacity is relatively high by international data 
monitoring standards, Colombia’s capacity is more limited when considered from a more Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
13 
 human -centred per spective. Statistical and data literacy levels remain relatively low in 
Colombia. Colombia has been improving its national results in standardised tests such as 
PISA in recent years, as well as results in the national test Pruebas Saber . However,  PISA test  
results are still lower than the average for OECD countries for mathematics (391 for 
Colombia vs 489 for OECD) and sciences (420 vs 488 for OECD). Interviewees described a 
need for more data literacy training across academia, particularly at the undergrad uate 
level, as well as in the public sector and civil society. Previous research illustrates how this 
lack of statistical and data literacy training manifests in skills gaps in Colombia. In a survey 
led by the National Planning Department in 2017 concernin g the use of data science in 
public entities, the results show low levels of exploitation of data for the generation of value 
in public administration. National entities state that lack of training in data analysis and 
applications is the main barrier (63% ) to data exploitation (DNP, 2018a). This relatively low 
level of human capital in statistical and data skills is part of the wider issue of Colombia 
having an underdeveloped data culture. In many sectors, data skills are low and their value 
poorly underst ood (Higgins et al, 2019). As such, there is not yet a strong culture of using 
data to find innovative solutions to social problems, restricting the development of 
expertise in the field. In response to this shortage of qualified data professionals, the 
government has explicitly called for action to generate mechanisms to materialise the value 
of data in the public sector and to institutionalise  the exploitation of data in public decision 
making (DNP, 2018a).  
 
Indeed, understanding the political will and ap petite for these skills and competencies in 
Colombia helps highlight the opportunities for Colombian higher education partners to 
develop a programme which is able to achieve the most impact by addressing the pressing 
sectoral needs and skills gaps. In thi s sense, the National Development Plan of the 
Colombian government presents a number of open doors. In particular, the Ministry of 
National Education, together with the National System of Science, Technology and 
Innovation, is committed to supporting the d evelopment of high -level human capital as a 
matter of objective priority (DNP, 2018b). There is strong will among policymakers to foster 
high -level professionals able to contribute in the ‘knowledge society’, and to support young 
people and professionals i nto education pathways that can contribute in this arena. As we 
have argued, the data fellowship model promotes a holistic skillset which helps develop 
well-rounded statisticians and data professionals, and there is clear demand for these skills 
from the C olombian government. Partnering with key organisations and public institutions 
in which shortages of statistical and data literacy have been identified helps to ensure that 
the programme builds talent pipelines directly into these gaps.  
 
Statistical and Data Capacity Development Pi peline  
 
A key strength of the capacity development pipeline in Colombia is that the country has a 
relatively strong academic sector from which expertise in teaching can be leveraged. 
However, there is a somewhat  limited offer of courses in relevant subjects: in 2017 there 
were only 75 formal education programs related to data science and analytics in the 
country, with only five of these at postgraduate level and just one PhD programme, while 
only 2.5% of the scholarships offered b y the Colombian government were in data skills -
related subjects (Higgins et al, 2019: 19). In particular, teaching expertise in statistical and 
data skills tends to fall more under the umbrella of mathematical education subjects which Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
14 
 do not always develop  the hybrid set of social research skills which the SDGs demand; social 
science subjects, on the other hand, tend to be more oriented towards theory than data 
analysis (Higgins et al, 2019). Interviewees from the statistical community thus emphasised 
“the need to build data literacy capacities towards fostering ‘hybrid’ professionals that can 
understand, use and analyze data for ‘social sciences’ purposes, i.e. evidence -informed 
policy, journalism, activism etc.” (Higgins et al, 2019: 32). Through its focus  on developing 
hybrid skills for working with data on complex social problems, the proposed model can 
help fill a clear skills gap in Colombia with regard to the supply of professionals capable of 
using data to find innovative solutions to social problems.  
 
The government’s SDG strategy recognises that academia, through both research and 
teaching, has a significant role to play in the field of innovation and training for the 
sustainability of future generations (DNP, 2018c). This presents an opportunity for  
educators to highlight how the data fellowship model fits within the current national 
development priorities and can contribute in the space of capacity development for the 
SDGs. The national SDG strategy also emphasises the need to establish mechanisms f or 
dialogue with non -governmental actors, and calls for partnerships for knowledge, financing 
and mobilisation towards the SDGs. Moreover, the government has highlighted stimulus for 
the interaction between university and business as a strategic objective in its Pact for 
Sciences, Innovation and Technology. The data fellowship model can thus provide a 
platform for strengthening university -industry partnerships and bolstering the country’s 
human capital in data -oriented fields and public innovation, both of which are development 
priorities in Colombia. These partnerships are at the heart of how data fellowships can 
achieve impact, as they involve a range of stakeholders who understand the particular 
needs and realities that can vary country to country. This p laces Colombian universities in a 
strong position to play a key role in supplying statistically and data literate talent for the 
delivery of the SDGs.  
 
However, one of the key challenges for Colombia is that there are pre -existing inequalities in 
education access which structure opportunities to develop statistical and data literacies and 
skills. There are generally high levels of dropout and low graduation rates. In 2016, the 
cohort dropout indicator stood at 45.1% for university students and 53.2 % for technicians 
and technologists, while the graduation rate was 37.4% and 27.1%, respectively (DNP, 
2018b). In 2015, only 62% of young adults had finished high school, and only 38% of high 
school graduates progressed into higher education (ibid.). This gap in access to education is 
driven by structural inequalities. In Colombia, 27% of the population is low -income and 7.8% 
is in extreme poverty (DANE, 2018). By 2017, young people in the top quintile of the income 
distribution had almost four times greate r access to higher education than young people 
from the bottom quintile. This is not only a question of high - and low -income, but also 
urban and rural. The population in rural areas of Colombia accumulate an average of 6 years 
of education, whereas in urba n areas this average goes up to 9.7 years (DNP, 2018b). The 
gap in access to primary education is around 10% and increases to 16% for tertiary 
education. These gaps mean that developing the data fellowship model through 
partnerships between higher educatio n institutions (particularly private universities in urban 
areas) and industry, civil society or government are at risk of “empowering the empowered” 
(Gurstein, 2011) and leaving behind the rural population when it comes to statistical and 
data literacy. T o combat this, there must be active efforts targeting the involvement and Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
15 
 recruitment of marginalised populations into a data fellowship programme. On a practical 
level, this could involve partnerships between the large private universities and regional 
universities with a student pool drawn from less privileged backgrounds. Another strategy is 
to aim to partner with organisations that work in rural areas, in order to better target the 
needs of those communities when designing projects for data fellows. The  use of digital 
course delivery methods such as MOOCs could also help to decentralise the educational 
components of the programme and improve rural access. Ultimately, evaluation 
mechanisms must be built into the intervention to ensure that partners are ab le to identify 
what works and what needs improvement to make the data fellows model work in 
Colombia.  
 
E. Conclusions  
 
The ever -expanding reach of statistics and data in the digital age means that there is a 
global need for capacity in the critical quantit ative skills required for understanding and 
working with data. The Sustainable Development Goals, the most ambitious exercise in the 
quantification of social progress we have seen, are a clear example of where demand for 
such skills is outstripping supply.  This demand can be a galvanising force for the 
development of statistics education programmes aimed at achieving impact where these 
skills are most needed. However, it is important that progress in this arena is not contained 
to the high -income countries of the Global North . Partnerships can be a key tool in building 
bridges between sectors and countries, to ensure that the data and expertise that already 
exist can be utilised  in developing and motivating the next generation of quantitative talent. 
In this paper we have argued for the value of thinking of statistical capacity as a pipeline 
which begins in the education system, and illustrated why investment in this end of the 
pipeline can be a more sustainable and long -term pathway to building up the holistic skill -
base needed to tackle the challenges of the SDGs. Through our review of the practical 
conditions underlying the development of such a programme in Colombia, we have 
illustrat ed that, although there are challenges in ensuring that educational access is equal, 
there are significant opportunities and open doors for addressing local skills gaps through 
data fellowships.  The next step of this research is thus to begin placi ng students within 
partner organisations in Colombia and learning what works well, what needs to be refined, 
and what may be scalable to other countries beyond Colombia.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
16 
 References  
Akinsola, E. F. and Sharma, D. (2018). “Capacity Building of Development al Scientists for Realization 
of the Sustainable Development Goals”. In Developmental Science and Sustainable Development 
Goals for Children and Youth  (eds. S. Verma, A. C. Petersen). Springer.  
Attaran, A. (2005). “An Immeasurable Crisis? A Criticism of th e Millennium Development Goals and 
Why They Cannot Be Measured”. PLoS Medicine  2 (10), DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020318 .  
Barbier, E. B. and Burgess, J. C. (2019). “Sustainable development goal indicators: Analyzing trade -
offs and complementarities”. Worl d Development  122, 295 -305.  
Bass, R. (2012). “Disrupting Ourselves: The Problem of Learning in Higher Education”. EDUCAUSE 
Review  47 (2), 23 -33. 
Burrill, G. (Interviewee). (2020, March 19). Stats + Stories, Episode 131  [Audio podcast]. [Online: 
https://statsandstories.net/education1/teaching -statistics].  
Carter, J., Brown, M., and Simpson, K. (2017). “From the Classroom to the Workplace: How Social 
Science Students Are Learning to Do Data Analysis for Real”. Statistics Education Research 
Journal  16 (1), 80 -101.  
Cooke, B., & Kothari, U. (Eds.). (2001). Participation: The new tyranny? . Zed books.  
DANE (2018). Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística, Government of Colombia: 
“Boletín Técnico, Pobreza monetaria en  Colombia”. Retrieved from 
https://www.dane.gov.co/files/investigaciones/condiciones_vida/pobreza/2018/bt_pobreza_m
onetaria_18.pdf  (acce ssed 19/1/2021).  
Dang, H. H. and Serajuddin, U. (2020) World Development  127, DOI: 
10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.05.024.  
DNP (2018a). Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Government of Colombia: “Documento 
CONPES 3920: Política Nacional de Explotación de Datos ( Big Data)”. Retrieved from 
https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Conpes/Econ%c3%b3micos/3920.pdf  (accessed 
19/1/2021).  
DNP (2018b). Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Gover nment of Colombia: “Plan Nacional de 
Desarrollo 2018 – 2022, Pacto por Colombia, pacto por la equidad”. Retrieved from 
https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Prensa/BasesPND2018 -2022n.pdf  (accessed 19/1/2021).  
DNP (2018c). Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Government of Colombia: “Documento 
CONPES 3918: Estrategia para la Implementación de los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible (ODS) 
en Colombia”. Retrieved from 
https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Conpes/Econ%C3%B3micos/3918.pdf  (accessed 
19/1/2021).  
Engel, J. (2017). “Statistical Literacy for Active Citizenship: A Call for Data Science Educatio n”. 
Statistics Education Research Journal  16 (1), 44 -49. 
Fisher, A. and Fukuda -Parr, S. (2019). “Introduction – Data, Knowledge, Politics and Localizing the 
SDGs”. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities  20 (4), 375 -385.  
Fukuda -Parr, S. and McNeill, D. (2019). “Knowledge and Politics in Setting and Measuring the SDGs: 
Introduction to Special Issue”. Global Policy  10 (Supplement 1), 5 -15. 
Gould, R. (2017). “Data Literacy Is Statistical Literacy”. Statistics Education Research Journal  16 (1), 
22-25. 
Gurstein, M. B. (2011). “Open data: Empowering the empowered or effective data use for 
everyone?”. First Monday  16 (2), DOI: 10.5210/fm.v16i2.33 16. 
Heeks, R., and Renken, J. (2018). “Data justice for development: What would it mean?”. Information 
Development  34 (1), 90 -102.  
Higgins, V., Casasbuenas, V., Ricard, J. and Carter, J. (2019). “EmpoderaData: Data Literacy 
Assessment and Sustainable Devel opment Goals Data Gaps”. Report – The University of 
Manchester and Data -Pop Alliance. Retrieved from https://datapopalliance.org/empoderadata -
project/  (accessed 17/12/2020).  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
17 
 Hobden, S. (2014 ). “When Statistical Literacy Really Matters: Understanding published information 
about the HIV/AIDS epidemic in South Africa”. Statistics Education Research Journal  13 (2), 72 -
82. 
Jütting, J. (2016). “Capacity Building, Yes – But How to Do It?” United Nat ions World Data Forum. 
Retrieved from https://unstats.un.org/unsd/undataforum/capacity -building -yes-but-how -to-do-
it/index.html  (accessed 9/6/2020).  
Keijzer, N. and Klingebiel, S. (2017). “Realising the Data Revolution for Sustainable Development: 
Towards Capacity Development 4.0.” PARIS21 Dis cussion Paper No. 9. Retrieved from 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2943055  (accessed 9/6/2020).  
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development . 
London: Prentice H all. 
Lokanathan, S., Perera -Gomez, T. and Zuhyle, S. (2017). “Mapping Big Data Solutions for the 
Sustinable Development Goals (draft)”. LIRNEasia. Retrieved from 
http://hdl.handle.net/10625/56906  (accessed 17/12/2020).  
MacFeely, S. (2019). “The Big (data) Bang: Opportunities and Challenges for Compiling the SDG 
Indicators”. Global Policy  10 (Supplement 1), 121 -133.  
MacFeely, S. and Barnat, N. (2017). “Statistical capacity building for sustainable development : 
Developing the fundamental pillars necessary for modern national statistical systems”. Statistical 
Journal of the IAOS  33, 895 -909.  
Merry, S. E. (2019). “The Sustainable Development Goals Confront the Infrastructure of 
Measurement”. Global Policy  10 (Sup plement 1), 146 -148.  
North, D., Gal, I. and Zewotir, T. (2014). “Building Capacity for Developing Statistical Literacy in a 
Developing Country: Lessons Learned from an Intervention”. Statistics Education Research 
Journal  13 (2), 15 -27. 
Nuffield (2014). Aim s and activities of the Q -Step centres. [Online: 
https://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/sites/default/files/files/Aims%20and%20Activities%20of%2
0the%20Q -Step%20Centres(1).pdf]  
Oburu, P. O. and Yoshikawa, H. (2018). “Roles of Multiple Stakeholder Partnerships i n Addressing 
Developmental and Implementation Challenges of Sustainable Development Goals”. In 
Developmental Science and Sustainable Development Goals for Children and Youth  (eds. S. 
Verma, A. C. Petersen). Springer.  
OECD (2015). “Strengthening National St atistical Systems to Monitor Global Goals”. The OECD Post -
2015 Reflection series Element 5, Paper 1.  
PARIS21 (2015). A Road Map for a Country -Led Data Revolution. [Online: 
https://datarevolution.paris21.org/sites/default/files/Road_map_for_a_Country_led_Data_Rev
olution_web.pdf ] 
PARIS21 (2019). Statistical Capacity Development – Outlook 2019.  
PARIS21 (n.d.). Capacity Development 4.0. Webpage. [Online: https://paris21.org/capa city-
development -40]. 
Prodromou, T., and Dunne, T. (2017). “Statistical Literacy in Data Revolution Era: Building Blocks and 
Instructional Dilemmas”. Statistics Education Research Journal 16 (1), 38 -43. 
Purdam, K. (2016). “Task -based learning approaches fo r supporting the development of social 
science researchers’ critical data skills”. International Journal of Social Research Methodology  19 
(2), 257 -267.  
Ridgway, J., Nicholson, J., and McCusker, S. (2013). “‘Open Data’ and the Semantic Web Require a 
Rethin k on Statistics Teaching”. Technology Innovations in Statistics Education  7 (2).  
Ridsdale, C., Rothwell, J., Smit, M., Ali -Hassan, H., Bliemel, M., Irvine, D., Kelley, D., Matwin, S., and 
Wuetherick, B. (2015). “Strategies and Best Practices for Data Liter acy Education (Knowledge 
Synthesis Report”.  DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.1922.5044.  
Roberts, J. (2018). “From the Editor: The Possibilities and Limitations of Experiential Learning 
Research in Higher Education”. Journal of Experiential Education  41 (1), 3 -7. Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 8 9 
18 
 Sach s, J. D. (2012). “From Millennium Development Goals to Sustainable Development Goals”. 
Lancet  379, 2206 -2211.  
Schield, M. (2004). “Information Literacy, Statistical Literacy and Data Literacy”. IASSIST Quarterly, 
Summer/Fall 2004 , 6-11. 
Schield, M. (2010).  “Assessing Statistical Literacy: Take CARE”. In Assessment Methods in Statistical 
Education: An International Perspective  (eds. P. Bidgood, N. Hunt and F. Jollife). Wiley and Sons.  
Stafford -Smith, M., Griggs, D., Gaffney, O., Ullah, F., Reyers, B., Kanie,  N., Stigson, B., Shrivastava, P., 
Leach M., and O’Connell, D. (2017). “Integration: the key to implementing the Sustainable 
Development Goals”. Sustainability Science  12, 911 -919.  
Stuart, E., Samman, E., Avis, W. and Berliner, T. (2015). “The Data Revolution: finding the missing 
millions”. ODI Research Report 03. Retrieved from  https://ww w.odi.org/publications/9476 -
data -revolution -finding -missing -millions  (accessed 17/12/2020).  
UN (2015). “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. Retrieved 
from 
https://sustainabledevelo pment.un.org/content/documents/21252030%20Agenda%20for%20S
ustainable%20Development%20web.pdf  (accessed 06/08/2020).  
UN (2020). “Global indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. [O nline: 
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/Global%20Indicator%20Framework%20after%202020%2
0review_Eng.pdf]  
UN IEAG (2014). “A World That Counts: Mobilising the data revolution for sustainable development”. 
United Nations Independent Expert Advisory Grou p on a Data Revolution for Sustainable 
Development. Retrieved from https://www.undatarevolution.org/wp -
content/uploads/2014/11/A -World -That -Counts.pdf  (acce ssed 06/08/2020).  
Wild, C. J. (2017). “Statistical Literacy as the Earth Moves”. Statistics Education Research Journal  16 
(1), 31 -37. 
World Bank (n.d.). Data on Statistical Capacity. Webpage. [Online: 
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/statisticalcapacity/ ] 
World Bank (2020). Statistical Capacity Dashboard  [online resource available at 
https://datatopics.worldbank.org/statisticalcapacity/SCIdashboard.aspx ]. Accessed 17/12/2020.  
Yayboke, E., Nealer, E. and Rice, C. (2017). “Harnessing the Data Revolution to Achieve the 
Sustainable Development Goals: Enabling Frogs to Leap”. A Report of the CSIS Project on 
Prosperity and Development with the JICA Research Institute.  