The Future We Aim For: 
Towards a “360 Resilience” Development Paradigm for the Caribbean 
Kari Grenade 
Allan WrightPOLICY BRIEF Nº 
IDB-PB-320Country Department Caribbean 
Group
September 2019The Future We Aim For: 
Towards a “360 Resilience” Development Paradigm for the Caribbean 
Kari Grenade 
Allan Wright
Macroeconomic Advisor, Government of Grenada Inter-American Development Bank
September 2019Cataloging-in-Publication data provided by the Inter-American 
Development Bank 
Felipe Herrera Library 
Grenade, Kari .
The future we aim for: towards a "360 Resilience" development paradigm 
for the Caribbean / Kari Grenade , Allan Wright.
p.cm. — (IDB Policy Brief ; 320)
1.Sustainable development-Caribbean Area.
2.Regional economics-Caribbean Area.  3.  Fiscal policy-Caribbean Area.
4. Climatic changes-Government policy-Caribbean Area.  
5.Caribbean Area-Economic policy.  6.  Caribbean Area-Social policy.
I. Wright, Allan.  II. Inter-American Development Bank. Country 
Department Caribbean Group.  III. Title.  IV. Series.
IDB-PB-320
CET@iadb.org
Allan Wright   Allanw@iadb.orgCopyright ©              Inter-American Development Bank. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/
legalcode ) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any non-commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed. 
Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB's name for any purpose other than for attribution, and the use of IDB's logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user and is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license. 
Note that link provided above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Inter-American 
Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent. http://www.iadb.org
2019Abstract  
This policy brie f discusses strategic imperatives to build “360 resilience ” in 
Caribbean countries. In this regard, it calls for a change of course in the region ’s 
development trajectory  and put s forward strategies  to build resilience on  several 
fronts: economic, fiscal, t echnological, social, environmental, and governance
and institutional .  Specifically, it argues for the following : (i) unlocking the 
economic potential of the Blue, the Green, and the Orange Economy ; (ii) 
modernizing agricultural production and practices ; (iii) strengthening fiscal 
governance ; (iv) expanding the use of digital technologies ; (v) building human 
and social  capital;  (vi) protecting environmental assets and reducing hazard and 
climate risks; and (vii) developing new governance and institutional models.
JEL Codes:  O10, O54, Q01
Keywords: Caribbean, r esilience,  sustainable  development 
“You never change  things by fighting the existing reali ty. To change something, build a 
new model that makes the existing model obsolete.”  
 
Buckminster  Fuller  
1. Introduction  
 
Building resilience is a key imperative for Caribbean countries, be they tourism -based economies 
or commodity -based ones.  Indeed, i n addition to l ong-standing development challenges, such as 
narrow production bases and vulnerability to external economic shocks, Caribbean countries have 
to confront new challenges such as climate change and new realities such as the 4th industrial 
revolution .  Old and new challenges must  be simultaneously addressed.  Grenade (2015) 
observed that the challenges that confront the Caribbean reg ion are extraordinary ones, and as 
such, must be matched by extraordinary policy responses.  
 
This policy b rief discusses  transformative shifts in policies  and strategic actions that can 
contribute  to building  “360 resilience” of Caribbean countries ,1 that is, resilience on several fronts : 
economic, fiscal, technological, social, environmental , and governance and institutional .  In 
building 360 resilience,  simply extrapolating  from the past or present development policies  might 
not be enough.   Indeed , policies to secure 360 resilience  must (i)  be bold, but realistic ; (ii) 
implemented urgently but with flexibility; and (iii) not be contradictory but  minimize tradeoff s.  This 
policy br ief explores some  options  in this regard and in so doing, contributes to the resilience and 
sustainable development discussions  that are ongoing in the Caribbean .  
 
Figures 1 to 6 provide a snapshot of trends in relevant socioeconomic indicators to expose the 
kinds of development outcomes and results that the Caribbean as a whole has experienced since 
2000.  Average per capita income levels rose steadily  over the period 2000 –2018 except for the 
dip in 2009, but the average increase over the entire sample period was modest , at 3.0 percent.  
Meanwhile, real GDP growth has been weak and erratic, averaging 2.1 percent over the 19 -year 
period.   Other important indicators of development, as measured by the Human Development 
Index , have improved slowly, but incom e inequality for the region has been persistent, though 
abating in recent years.  Moreover, fiscal challenges2 have been long-running,  with public debt 
being burdensome for the majority of Caribbean countries, averaging 76.0 percent for the 
Caribbean as wh ole over the 19 -year period.  Trends in governance indicators3 show that the 
region did well in two areas —voice and accountability and political stability —but faltered in 
regulatory quality and government effectiveness .4 
On balance, the trends in the development indicators examined indicate limited socioeconomic 
progress of the region over the past 19  years. Indeed, a change of course in the region’s 
 
1In this policy brief, the Caribbean is defined as the 14 independent member countries of the Caribbean Community (C ARICOM ): 
Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, 
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.  
2An inefficient public service and weak fiscal governance have impacted the credibility of gover nance throughout the region. However, 
recent adoption of fiscal responsibility legislation in some countries (The Bahamas, Grenada, and Jamaica) and fiscal reforms  have 
started to raise hopes that the high levels of the budget deficit and debt burden will gradually be reduced, while changing the fiscal -
structural culture towards one of better public sector financial management.  
3Available information on governance points to a decline in the government ’s performance in the past decade. The rate of decline is  
more noticeable in government effectiveness, rule of law (which includes, among others, the quality of the police, the courts , and the 
likelihood of crime and violence) and regulatory quality.  
4The Caribbean as a whole is a difficult environment to do bus iness. The ranking remains low in the World Bank ’s Doing Business 
indicators. The Doing Business report identifies several areas of regulatory inefficiency —required time and cost, as well as 
cumbersome processes for regulatory compliance —that negatively af fect private business. The Caribbean region ranks particularly 
low on registering a property, starting a business, connecting to the electrical grid, and obtaining constructions permits. T he process 
to start a business  illustrates the challenges for busine sses. It involves up to eight different procedures at eight different agencies, 
requiring on average 21 days in some  Caribbean  countries.  3 
 development trajectory is necessary and urgent. A multifaceted approach is required that 
integrates economic, fiscal, technological, social,  environmental , and institutional change to 
secure inclusive, sustainable , and resilient development in Caribbean countries.  
 
 
Sources: World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019 and World Development Indicators.  
Notes: *In the absence of Gini coefficient data, an approach used by Rodrick (201 3) is followed , which proxie s 
income  inequality  as the ratio of average per capita income to  median per capita income.   A ratio exceeding 1 
implies that the income of the average pers on exceeds that of the median income for the country, which can be 
interpreted as a sign of income inequality.  
Haiti’s data is not included in the calculation of the Caribbean averages because of data unavailability and 
inconsistencies.  
7,309 
7,373 
7,632 
7,896 
8,360 
9,132 
9,883 
10,769 
11,483 
10,517 
10,796 
11,117 
11,339 
11,505 
11,808 
11,971 
11,798 
12,025 
12,373 
-2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018US $Real GDP per Capita -Caribbean Average
4.1
1.12.54.9
3.74.05.3
3.8
2.3
-2.80.31.51.11.42.3
1.50.81.11.22000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018Real GDP: Caribbean Average
(Annual percent change)
0.710.720.720.720.730.730.730.73
0.700.710.710.720.720.730.730.74
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017HDI Score -Caribbean Average
1.391.49
1.32
1.28
1.151.201.251.301.351.401.451.501.55
2000
2006
2012
2018Inequality Ratio -Caribbean*
-0.2-0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017Governance Indicators: Caribbean Average
Voice & Accountability
Political Stability/Absence of Violence/Terrorism
Government Effectiveness
Regulatory Quality
Rule of LawFigure 1. Average incomes levels of the Caribbean as a whole 
have increased over the past 19 years, but sluggishly 
especially since 2009Figure 2. Meanwhile, average GDP growth of the Caribbean as 
a whole  has been volatile and particularly tepid in recent years
Figure 3. Average HDI Scores for the Caribbean as a whole 
have slowly improvedFigure 4. But inequality is a concern66
74
81
81
81
79
74
67
67
75
77
78
79
79
78
76
79
78
76
0102030405060708090
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018Percent of GDPGross General Government Debt: Caribbean 
AverageFigure 5. And public debt  is burdensome Figure 6. While some Governance indicators are worrisome4 
 2. Towards  360 Resilience  
 
A 360 resilien ce development paradigm for the  Caribbean require s strategic actions  to build  
resilience on several fronts: economic, fiscal, technological, social, environmental, and 
governance and institutional .  Each is discussed in turn.  
 
2.1  Economic  Resilience  
 
Unlocking the economic potential of the Blue Economy, the Green Economy and the Orange 
Economy ; and modernizing agriculture are key elements  to accelerate inclusive growth and 
sustainable development  and build economic resilience .   
 
2.1.1  The Blue Economy  
 
The notion of a “Blue Economy  was first raised at the Rio+20 Conference  (OECD, 2016).   The 
blue economy is particularly relevant for countries with large marine areas and coastlines such 
as those in the Caribbean.  The Caribbean Sea covers 2.75 million square kilometers .  Because  
Caribbean developing states are small island nations , they are also big ocean countries.  Indeed , 
the Caribbean Sea is a natural resource  that can be leveraged to promote socioeconomic 
transformation by providing  a source of economic activity and jobs that can increase  countries ’ 
wealth , while simultaneously building their  resilience to climate change .  The blue economy is a 
new frontier fo r growth and sustainable development  for the Caribbean .  
 
Patil et al. (2016)  observe d that increasing numbers of countries are looking to the ocean to 
industrialize and grow .5  The OECD (2016) project ed that the growth of ocean -based industries 
can out pace that of the global economy , and by 2030 the ocean economy could more than double 
its economic contribution .6  For Caribbean countries, Patil et al. (2016) posit ed that the Caribbean 
Sea would become an important means of economic diversification by providing new sources of 
food, energy , and jobs  in the y ears to come.   They estimated that the gross revenue generated 
by the Caribbean ’s blue economy was around US$407 billion as of 2012.  
 
The Caribbean Development Bank ( CDB, 2018) identified several opportunities that the ocean 
presents to advance the sustainable development and transformation of Caribbean countries .  
These are found in the areas of  fisheries and aquaculture, coastal and marine tourism, marine 
renewable energy, and marine trans port. CDB  (2018)  also identified important inputs , such as 
awareness, infrastructure, start -up investment , and policy , that are needed to grow the 
Caribbean ’s blue economy .  The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) 
Commission ’s Eastern Caribbean Regional Oceans Policy and Action Plan (2013)  laid out a 
roadmap to support the transition to a blue economy .7  Individual countries also have policy 
 
 Caribbean Countries with an Oceans Policy  
Countries  Progress  Implementation status  Legislation  
The Bahamas  Policy document / 
National Development 
Plan  Advance  Ongoing  
OECS  Policy document  Advance  no 
Jamaica  Policy document  Advance  yes 
Barbados  Ongoing  Developing  no 
6The most recent estimate, in 2012, indicates that globally, the economic contribution of the ocean was around 
US$1.5 trillion annually, or about 3 percent of global value -added (OECD, 2016).  
7Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, British Virgin Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Martinique, Montserrat,  
St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St . Vincent and the Grenadines.  5 
 documents that support the development of the blue economy ; according to Patil et al. (2016), 
these countries are the Bahamas ,8 Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines , and Grenada.   The Inter-American Development Bank ( IDB)9 and the IDB Lab , and 
in alliance with the Compete Caribbean Partnership Facility, and supported by  the Department for 
International Developmen t, CDB , and the Government of Canada, will help detect  firms and 
organizations seeking  to test and gauge  business models that use critical  technologies to 
contribute to the sustainable management of marine ecosystems and coastal resources.  
 
To move from policy to practical , sustainable , and  implementable actions that promote ocean 
wealth while simultaneously protecting ocean health , a comprehensive , results -oriented 
implementation framework is  needed .  Regional and national actions must be cost ed where 
feasible and financing identified.  The implementation framework must be underpinned  by credible 
and robust institutional and governance arrangements to promote accountability for results.  
 
2.1.2 The Green Economy  
 
In broad terms, the “Green Economy ” concept has its intellectual lineage in the early ideas about 
the inter -relationship between economic activity and sustainable environmental management 
espoused in the United Nation ’s 1987 Bruntland Commission Report.   Since the global economic 
and financial crisis of 2008 , the green econ omy concept has increasin gly become  prominent in 
international , regional , and national development debates  and policy documents as countries 
seek new models of economic development that are premised on sustainability.    
 
CDB (2014) identified green sectors, industries , and economic activities with the potential to 
advance the economic transformation and sustai nable development of the Caribbean.  Prime 
areas of opportunities are tourism, transport, and renewable ener gy.  The study offered practical 
recommendations as well as concrete advice and direction to steer the Caribbean ’s transition to 
a green economy through low -carbon development pathways.  
 
Five years on since CDB ’s research , stepped -up actions and scaled -up investments are needed 
to accelerate the region ’s transition to a green economy .  Actions are required to establish the 
appropriate legislative and institutional frameworks and arrangements to support development of 
the green economy and create opportunities for “green ” jobs and investments .10  Bold actions are 
also needed to encourage and incentivize greater private sector involvement through eith er 
strategic partnerships with the public sector or direct private sector investment s in green sectors,  
industrie s, and technologies.   A comprehensive regional financing strategy that identifies sources, 
options, modalities, financiers , and partners has to be part of the suit e of strategic actions to push 
forward the region ’s low -carbon and green development agenda .11  Institutional strengthening, 
 
 
8The Bahamas will have its first novel marine waste reception and processing plant that uses cutting -edge technologies 
to contribute to the preservation and protection of the blue economy and ocean environment and the improvement of 
the livelihoods dependen t upon them.  It will also improve the water quality and effluent treatment of isolated 
communities.  The IDB Lab approved the project was approved in June 2019.  
9The IDB will consider qualifying entities to implement a development project to pilot the bl ue economy model in one of 
the 14 target countries.  The funding requests should be within a range of US$150,000 to US$500,000 for non -
reimbursable technical assistance (grants). Proposals for loans should be within a range of US$500,000 to 
US$2,000,000, a nd the proponent entity should contribute at least 50 percent of the project budget.  
10Evolution of green economic governance through the making of diverse connections, conducting trials, selecting 
successes, and deploying ways to ‘amplify ’ success so as to  both scale them up and speed them up. Available at: 
https://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/16572IIED.pdf  
11Jamaica and The Bahamas have developed national policies on environmental management systems  (EMS) in  
keeping with the respective governments ’ commitment to improve environmental performance in support of 
sustainable development and the development of a green economy, as outlined in Vision 2030 Jamaica - National 6 
 capacity building (intellectual and technical) , research and outreach, and mainstreaming green 
principles in development plans, policies , and public financial management systems also need to 
be intensified.    
 
2.1.3  The Orange Economy  
 
The “Orange Economy, ” a term coined by the IDB (IDB, 2017a) , refers to all sectors and industries 
whose goods and services are based on intellectual property.  The creative industr y, including  
arts, craft , fashion, videogames, film,  TV, as well as the cultural industr y including music, 
carnivals, visual and perform ing arts , are covered under the rubric of the orange economy. 
According to the IDB (2017a), t he creative and cultural industr y is one of the fastest growing in 
the world.   The I DB (2017b) estimated that in 2015, the orange economy generated more than 
US$124.0 billion in revenues and provided jobs to more than 1.9 million people in Latin America 
and the Caribbean.   Indeed, a shift is occurring in the world ’s economy  from one based on 
manufacturing and heavy industries to one of knowledge, information, c reativity and innovation.   
 
The Caribbean is rich in culture and creativity . If properly leveraged, this culture can provide yet 
another pathway to build resilience through economic diversification and transformation .  
Unlocking the economic potential of the  orange economy will require strong enabling institutional 
arrangements, progressive policies , and legislation that de -risk investments in the creative and 
cultural economy, new markets for cultural and creative products, creative financing , and mindset 
shifts away from limitations and obstacles towards possibilities and opportunities.   A 
comprehensive strategy and results -oriented action plan must be developed not only  to build 
economic resilience and promote  sustainable and inclusive growth and development, but equally 
important, to preserve and consolidate the region ’s rich cultural heritage and identity.   
 
2.1.4  Modern Agriculture  
 
The Food and Agricultural Organization ( FAO) and CDB (2019)  reported that growth in agricultural 
productivity in the Caribbean region12 has been slow ; consequently , the sector h as been unable 
to meet the ever -increasing demand for high value -added  products.   Moreover, agriculture is 
highly vulnerable to climate change.   Thus, there is  a strategic imperative for the region as a 
collective to address the pressing challenges that constrain the sector ’s productivity and 
performance and limit its ability to adequately contribute to the region ’s food  security and 
ultimately its susta inable development .  Focused attention must be paid to value -added 
production , the use of modern technology, youth involvement , capacity building , research and 
development , and adaptation to climate change.   
 
Increasing the value of primary agricultural products is crucially important to enhance the 
competitiveness of agricultural exports and ultimately boost foreign exchange earnings, economic 
diversification, and sector linkages within and across countries.  Increasing the value -added of 
agricultural commodities would help to improve livelihoods  and reduce poverty , especially in rural 
communities , through the creation of high er-paying jobs (relative to what would be paid to harvest 
raw products) and relatively  more stable income  flows  for farmers.   Increasing value -added in 
production would  require widespread use of modern technology, robust research and 
development, access to financing, and an enabling institutional ecosystem that supports famers ’ 
 
Development Plan and Vision2040, The Bahamas ’ National Development Plan.  
12The agricu lture sector in some Caribbean countries currently accounts for a smaller share of the economy that it did 
in the 1970s and 1980s. In the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, and Trinidad and Tobago, agriculture 
represents less than 1 percent of GDP .  In other countries, such as Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, and Haiti, 
agriculture is still an important sector of the economy. See FAO and CDB (2019).  7 
 business education, strategic marketing , and efficient logistics.  Expanding the widespread use 
of modern technology is also critically important to achieve key development objectives  such as 
improv ing farming practices, boosting agricultural production and , by extension, increasing 
economic output, jobs, and wealth.   Furthermore, the creation of Caribbean -specific  agricultural 
technological a pplications would  address critical priorities , such as  connect ing famers to markets 
throughout the Caribbean and attracting young people to the sector . 
 
Ensuring that the agricultur e sector adequately adapts to climate change is a pressing priority.  
Accordingly, ongoing efforts within and across countries must be scaled up  to mainstream climate -
smart agricultural practices, such as using modernized irrigation systems and farming meth ods, 
increasing organic production to reduce the use of harmful chemicals and pesticide s, and 
bolstering haz ard mitigation measures through  mechanism s such as a regional agricultural 
insurance framework.  Effective land -use planning and management within a nd across countries 
would also be important to promote the sector ’s adaptation to climate change.  
 
2.2 Fiscal Resilience  
 
Building f iscal resilience is crucial  to sustainable development in Caribbean countries .  Strategic 
actions within and across countries that institutionalize strong public financial management 
systems are needed to build fiscal buffers, increas e fiscal savings, entrench fiscal discipline, 
support good fiscal governance , and promot e fiscal tr ansparency and accountability.  Wright, 
Grenade , and Scott -Joseph (2017) called for the urgent adoption of fiscal responsibility laws 
(FRLs), with explicit fiscal rules enshrined to usher in a new fiscal -structural culture.  They argued 
that FRLs are needed to support transformative shifts in fiscal practices as well as the institutional 
arrangements and systems that undergird fiscal management.   
 
At the time of this writing , only Jamaica, Grenada, and The Bahamas had a n FRL with explicit 
fiscal rules enshrined.  Grenada ’s fiscal performance improved markedly since the adoption of its 
FRL in 2016 .  The public debt and primary surplus as ratios of GDP averaged 67.7 and 5.7 
percent,  respectively , in 2017 –2018 , compared to an average  of 96.2  percent  and a  primary deficit 
of 2.3 percent,  correspondingly , in 2014 –2015 .  Jamaica13 reduced  interest payments to 11.0  
percent  of GDP in fiscal year 2010 –2011, from an average of 16.0  percent  in previous periods. 
Losses in public entities were reduced, generating savings of 2.3 percentage points.   The 
Bahamas Fiscal Responsibility Legislation was passed in October 2018, and as such, it is too 
early to assess fiscal outcomes.  
 
The remaining independent member countries of CARICOM  will be well served to adopt FRLs 
with enshrined fiscal rules as a strategic imperative to build fiscal resilience with in their respective 
territories and the region as a whole .  Importantly also, all countries should pursue climate -smart 
fiscal policies that mainstream climate resilience into public financial management systems and 
practices.   
 
2.3 Technological Resilience  
 
The World Economic Forum (2018) reported that  countries in Latin America and the Caribbean  
have low levels of digitization and technology adoption rates compared to other regions .  In this 
digital era, the Caribbean region must intensify ongoing efforts to fully unlock the transformative 
powers of dig ital technologies.   
 
 
13 https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2013/07/03/jamaica -fiscal -sustainability.  8 
 First, the region ’s digital infrastructure and ecosystem  in both the public and the private sectors 
must be upgraded and scaled  up to adequate ly support modern e -government and e -commerce 
activities.  According to Suominen (2017 : 33), a digital -enabling environment requires “internet 
connectivity, well-functioning online payments, work forces with technological skills, regulations 
conducive to dig ital trade, and entrepreneurship .”  Grenade and Wright (2018) observed that 
financial institutions in the Caribbean w ould have to harness the powers of digital technologies to 
re-engineer themselves if they are to remain relevant in the 21st century because financial 
institutions of the future will be digitally driven.  
 
Second, barriers to digital trade and transaction must be dismantled.  Suominen (2017 ) reported 
several e -frictions affecting the operations of existing digital companies and  potential entrants in 
the digital trade space, such as market access and regulatory barriers, customs procedures, 
online payments , and legal liability issues.  Removing the barriers will require new and 
progressive legislation, enabling regulatory regimes , new trade policies, and strategic 
partnerships within and across Caribbean countries.  It would also be important for Caribbean 
countries to deepen regional integration efforts through harmonized regional strategies and 
policies to address common issues such as cybersecurity, consumer protection, privacy, and 
internet interoperability to ultimately accelerate digital trade within the region.  
 
Third, digital skills and literacy must be fundamentally improved if the region is to thrive in the 
digital  era of the 21st century and beyond.   There is a need for a comprehensive regional strategy 
to guide the Caribbean ’s digital up -skilling and capacity building to allow the region to effectively 
function in the digital economy.  
 
2.4 Social Resilience  
 
The World Bank (2018) has documented  ongoing efforts of the Caribbean community as a 
collective to build resilience.  However, m uch more concerted effort is required to s trengthen social 
resilience , including  (i) improving social safety nets and social protection systems for greater 
impact and development results ; (ii) increasing  the capacity and capabilities of communities to 
rebuild and bounce back after shocks ; (iii) creating pathways for individuals and communities  to 
own assets and pursue wealth -creating activities (not merely income -generating ) activities;  (iv) 
building human capital by investing more in  health and  education , including both academic and 
vocational -technical  training to build the skills that will be necessary  for the jobs of the future ; (v) 
mainstreaming inclusion and equality in development planning and programming ; specifically , 
policies to build s ocial resilience must address gender issues and priorities; ( vi) bolstering citizen 
security and safety ; and (vii) scaling up investments in disaster -resilient infrastructure.  
 
2.5 Climate Resilience  
 
The Caribbean is one of the region ’s most vulnerable to climate change, especially the impacts 
from rising sea levels and increasing intensity and frequency of tropical storms and hurricanes.  
Ongoing efforts of individual Caribbean countries and the region as a whole to adapt to climate 
change and mitigate its effects must be bolstered.  Of necessity, the region as a collective must 
increase and intensify its advocacy for “climate justice. ”  It is well known that Caribbean countries 
contribute minutely to global greenhouse gas emissions but  are disproportionately affected 
relative to the large emitter countries , whose activities are contributing to climate change.   
Regenvanu and Persaud (2018 : 1) sum med it up well: “It's time for those who caused climate 
change to pay for it .  If the consequences of climate change were felt disproportionately by those 
who have contributed to it, it would have stopped long ago. ”  
 9 
 Caribbean countries must be more forceful in calling on the international community to establish 
a fairer and more morally  just damage and loss global f unding facility , which would require those 
countries whose activities are contributing  the most  to climate change (largest emitters of 
greenhouse gasses) to make  payouts (grants) to countries , such as those in the Carib bean , that 
contribute the least to green house gas emission s but  are disproportionately affected by  the effects 
of climate change.   
 
The fact that Caribbean countries are small contributors to global  greenhouse gas emissions but  
suffer disproportionately from the impacts of climate change does not absolve  Caribbean 
countries , individually and as a collective , from taking full responsibility for building climate 
resilience and  reducing disaster risks .  Indeed, Caribbean countries must intensify efforts to (i) 
mainstream climate resilience in development planning and policies ; (ii) strengthen the legislative 
and regulatory frameworks to support sound environmental management and practices ; (iii)  
develop a  risk-layering strategy for climate financing that includes contingency funds; (iv) enhanc e 
disaster risk management systems; and (v) increas e climate -smart education by heightening 
public awareness and building a culture of respect for and preservation of  the environment and 
natural resources.  
 
2.6 Governance and Institution al Resilience  
 
It is well appreciated that good governance and strong institutions are essential for sustainable 
growth and development and ultimately a resilient Caribbean. The IDB (2018) provided a 
comprehensive and rich exposition o f the Caribbean ’s institutional cont ext and the role of 
institution s in underpinning the region ’s sustainable and resilient  development.  It focused mainly 
on economic and political institutions, as well as those related to the rule of law and the 
development of human capital.  However, i nclusive governance, that is, the involvement of 
ordinary citizens in the governance and decision -making  processes  within their countries , is also 
crucially important.  Indeed, an empowered, engaged, and active citizenry is essential to promote 
transparenc y in public policies and accountability of those implementing public policies.  Citizen 
engagement is also important to promote country ownership (not just government ownership) of 
development projects and programs.  Citizens must have a voice and must be able to exercise 
their democratic rights and freedoms to  shape public policies and programs, with a view to 
bring ing about positive changes be they socioeconomic, environmental or governance -related , 
and in so doing, build governance and institutional resi lience.  
 
3 Conclusion  
 
This policy brief examined options  to build 360 resilience in Caribbean countries.  It identified 
transformative shifts in policies, practices , and institutional arrangements that are required to 
secure the region’s resilience on several  fronts: economic, fiscal, technological, social, 
environmental, and governance and institutional.  Prioritization and sequencing of strategic 
actions will depend  on country context and are beyond the scope of this paper.  
 
The policy brief also called for collective responsibility in building a 360 resilience development 
paradigm for the Caribbean.  Policymakers  in the public sector  and non-state actors must  share 
responsibility  in supporting the formulation and implementation of strategic policies to bestow to 
generations to come a Caribbean that is inclusive, wealthy, and resilient on all fronts.  
Development partners also have a crucial role to play in guiding the design of strategic actions, 
as well as supporting their implementation through technical and financial assistance.   10 
 References  
 
CDB ( Caribbean Development Bank ). 201 4. A New Paradigm f or Caribbean Development: 
Transitioning to a Green Economy. Bridgetown, Barbados: Caribbean Development Bank.  
 
_____. 2018 . Financing the Blue Economy: A Ca ribbean Development Opportunity.  Bridgetown, 
Barbados: Caribbean Development Bank.  
 
Food and Agricultural Organization and Caribbean Development Bank. 2019. Study on the State 
of Agriculture in the Caribbean. CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO. Rome, Italy: Food and Agricultural 
Organization.  
 
Grenade,  K. 2015. Caribbean Dev elopment: Past and Future . Developing Count ry Studies  5(19): 
31–43. 
 
Grenade, K. and A. Wright. 2018. Macro -Critical Issues and Implications for the Financial Sector 
in CARICOM.  IDB Policy Brief No. IDB-PB-272. Washington, DC: Inter -American Development 
Bank.  
 
IDB ( Inter-American Development B ank). 2017a. Future Landscapes of the Orange Economy : 
Creative Pathways for Impro ving Lives  in Latin America and the Caribbean . Washington, DC: 
Inter-American Development Bank.  
 
_____. 20 17b. Orange Economy: Innovations You May Not Know Were from L atin America and 
the Caribbe an. Washington, DC: Inter -American Development Bank.  
 
_____. 2018. Nurturing Institutions for a Resilient Caribbean . Washington, DC: Inter-American 
Development Bank.  
 
OECS ( Organizati on of Eastern Caribbean States ). 2013 . Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean 
Policy. Castries, St. Lucia: Organization of Eastern Caribbean States Secretariat . 
 
OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ). 2016. The Ocean Economy 
in 2030.  Paris, France:  OECD Publishing.  Available  at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/  
9789264251724 -en. 
 
Patil, P. , J. Virdin , S. Diez , J. Roberts, and A Singh. 2016 .  Toward a Blue Economy: A Promise 
for Sust ainable Growth in the Caribbean,  An Overview. Washington , D.C: The World Bank.  
 
Regenvanu , R. and A. Persaud . 2018. It's Time for Those Who Caused Climate Change to Pay 
for It. Thompson Reuters Foundation , United Kingdo m.  http://news.trust.org/item/  
20181206165251 -g7ixe/ . 
 
Rodrik, D. 2013 . The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth . Working Paper No. 1 . 
Munich, Germany: Global Citizen Foundation . 
 
Suominen, K.  2017.  Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.  IDB Working 
Paper Series No.  IDB-WP-790. Washington, DC: Inter -American Development Bank.  
 
United Nations. 1987. Our Common Future. Report of the World Commission on Environment 
and De velopment. New York, United States. http://www.un -documents.net/our -common -11 
 future.pdf . 
 
World Bank. 2018. Small Yet Strong: The Caribbean Embraces the Quest for Resilience. 
Washington, DC: The World Bank.  
 
World Economic Forum. 2018. How Latin America and the Caribbean Can Unlock its Digital 
Potential . Geneva, Switzerland : World Economic Forum. Available at: 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/03/how -latin-america -and-the-caribbean -can-unlock -its-
digital -potential/.  
 
Wright, A, K . Grenade, and A. Scott -Joseph. 2017 . Fiscal Rules: Towards a New Paradigm for 
Fiscal Sustainability in Small States.  IDB Working Pa per Series No. IDB-WP-780. Washington, 
DC: Inter -American Development Bank.  