See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/324515072
Youth-led commu nication for social change: empowerment, citizen media,
and cultu res of governance in Northern Ghana
Article    in  Development in Pr actic e · April 2018
DOI: 10.1080/09614524.2018.1436696
CITATIONS
5READS
923
2 author s:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
The le gacy of P aulo F reire on Communic ation and Civil Socie ty De velopment  View pr oject
Critic al P erspectiv es on Ne w Media and Social Chang e in the Glob al South  View pr oject
Lise Gr auenk ær
4 PUBLICA TIONS    5 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Thomas T ufte
Loughbor ough Univ ersity
64 PUBLICA TIONS    265 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Lise Gr auenk ær on 17 Dec ember 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cdip20
Development in Practice
ISSN: 0961-4524 (Print) 1364-9213 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cdip20
Youth-led communication for social change:
empowerment, citizen media, and cultures of
governance in Northern Ghana
Lise Grauenkaer & Thomas Tufte
To cite this article:  Lise Grauenkaer & Thomas Tufte (2018) Youth-led communication for
social change: empowerment, citizen media, and cultures of governance in Northern Ghana,
Development in Practice, 28:3, 400-413, DOI: 10.1080/09614524.2018.1436696
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2018.1436696
Published online: 13 Apr 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Youth-led communication for social change: empowerment,
citizen media, and cultures of governance in Northern Ghana
Lise Grauenkaer and Thomas Tufte
ABSTRACT
This article critically assesses the possibilities and limitations of strategic
communication initiatives to enhance cultures of governance among
youth in Northern Ghana. The analysis is embedded within
contemporary debates about communication and social change, with
particular focus upon dynamics between citizen media development,youth-centred citizen journalism, and processes of community
mobilisation and development. Findings suggest that the project has
opened up to dynamic, youth-led social change processes, evidenced by
the creative, proactive enactment of citizen engagement. Youth
changed not only their self-perception around agency and ability to act,but also influenced community development in a variety of ways.
Cet article présente une évaluation critique des possibilités et des limites
des initiatives de communication stratégique visant à renforcer les
cultures de la gouvernance parmi des jeunes au Ghana. L ’analyse est
ancrée dans les débats contemporains sur la communication et le
changement social, avec une attention particulière sur la dynamique
entre le développement des médias citoyens, le journalisme citoyencentré sur les jeunes, et les processus de mobilisation et de
développement communautaires. Les résultats suggèrent que le projet
s’est ouvert aux processus dynamiques de changement social conduits
par des jeunes, comme en témoigne la mise en œuvre créative et
proactive de l ’engagement citoyen. Les jeunes ont non seulement
changé leur propre perception, relativement à l ’agentivité et la capacité
à agir, mais aussi influencé le développement communautaire deplusieurs manières.
Desde una perspectiva crítica, el presente artículo valora las posibilidades y
las limitaciones que conllevan estratégicas iniciativas en comunicación
destinadas a mejorar las culturas de gobernanza entre los jóvenes del
norte de Ghana. Este análisis forma parte de los debates actuales en
torno a la comunicación y el cambio social, centrados particularmente
en las dinámicas surgidas con la evolución de los medios ciudadanos, elperiodismo ciudadano centrado en la juventud y los procesos de
movilización y desarrollo a nivel comunitario. Los hallazgos al respecto
sugieren que tales iniciativas han respondido a dinámicos procesos decambio encabezados por jóvenes; los mismos son evidenciados por la
participación ciudadana creativa y proactiva. Además, los jóvenes no
solo transformaron su autopercepción sobre su autonomía y capacidad
para actuar, también incidieron en el desarrollo comunitario de
múltiples maneras.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 9 August 2017
Accepted 15 January 2018
KEYWORDS
Civil society –Participation;
Gender and diversity –Youth;
Technology –Media; Sub-
Saharan Africa
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Thomas Tufte tt134@le.ac.ukDEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE, 2018
VOL. 28, NO. 3, 400 –413
https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2018.1436696Introduction
“The Youth Speak Up project has given us a voice, we the youth. We are now taking part in decision-making pro-
cesses in our various communities.” (Listener Club member, District A)
Using communication strategically to empower youth to catalyse social change processes is increas-
ing in the Global South and new initiatives are continuously being developed and implemented. Thisarticle aims to explore the possibilities and limitations of such strategic communication initiatives in
advancing cultures of governance, using a case study in the Northern Region in Ghana. We embed
our analysis within contemporary debates about communication, empowerment, and social change,offering a critical inquiry into the change processes the case project claims to articulate.
Youth in Ghana, and especially in the deprived Northern Region, experience numerous develop-
ment challenges –poor educational background, lack of employment opportunities, and exclusion
from decision-making –making it extremely hard for them to shape their own future and voice
the injustices rendering them in a position of frustrating inaction (Gyampo 2012 ; in Korboe 2014 ).
Furthermore, youth movements and youth organisations have limited access to media or other com-munication platforms. Youth are, however, actively seeking to organise and join forces in various
ways in their quest for better conditions, and an increasing number of youth organisations are start-
ing to position youth as drivers of social change.
One of these youth-led organisations is Youth Empowerment for Life (YEfL) who, in collaboration
with the Danish organisation Ghana Friends, work towards empowering youth in Northern Ghana bydeveloping local youth organisations ’and groups ’communicative capacity and access to media plat-
forms to support active citizenship and engagement of young people to address injustices. Their
project “Youth Speak Up ”(YSU), which we explore in this article, was a two-year project (2015 –17)
linked to some of their longer-term and larger projects.
1
YSU ’s strategic foundation builds on an assumption that youth and youth organisations can be
empowered to take on development issues and catalyse social change and public debate by
strengthening their communicative capacity, and improving access to platforms. It is also assumedthat combining radio, social media, and interpersonal communication will create strong synergies
that enhance their voice, create new local knowledge, and increase their channels of influence.
This article explores these underlying assumptions and the possibilities and limitations they posein advancing a culture of governance and empowerment of the youth.
Our main research question is: What are the possibilities and limitations of strategic communi-
cation initiatives to enhance a culture of governance among youth in Northern Ghana? This is com-plemented by two sub-questions:
(1) To which degree does the strategic use of communication catalyse a transformation in the par-
ticipating youth ’s perception of agency and empowerment?
(2) What is the causal relation between the chosen forms of communicative engagement designed
by the Youth Speak Up project and the identified social change processes?
This article has five sections. The first section introduces our case and embeds it in a situational
analysis of the youth ’s social, political, and economic conditions in Northern Ghana. Second, the
literature review critically debates questions of empowerment, citizen media, local knowledge pro-
duction and their roles in enhancing “cultures of governance ”(Gonzalez 2014 ; Tufte 2017a ). This
provides the analytical framework for exploring the research questions. We then outline ourresearch design and methodology, before, in the fourth section, presenting and discussing thekey findings anchored in a series of “change stories ”identified during fieldwork. In conclusion,
we offer our final reflections and findings about cultures of governance among youth in NorthernGhana, their change in agency and empowerment, and how the project initiatives have articulatedsocial change processes.DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 401Youth in Northern Ghana –challenges and opportunities
Youth in Northern Ghana ’s challenges and opportunities are embedded in social, political, and econ-
omic structures specific to the Northern Region. During recent years Ghana has been seen as a posi-
tive story in terms of political and economic development in Africa, and the country is considered bymany as one of the most stable democracies in Africa. Ghana has experienced positive economic
development for many years, and from 2000 to 2017 averaged 6.8% in annual growth in GDP, and
GDP per capita in the same period grew from US$263 to USD$1,513. Hence, Ghana reached lowermiddle-income country status in 2010. Youth between the ages of 15 and 35 constitute 35% of
the total population in Ghana (Ghana Statistical Service 2012 , 23).
However, there is a historical North –South divide in standards of living dating back to colonial
times which continues to be significant (Cooke, Hague, and McKay 2016 ). Half of the population in
the Northern Region was recorded as poor in 2013, compared to only 5.6% in the Greater Accra
Region in the South. The Northern Region holds the largest number of poor people in all of Ghanaand is the region with the smallest improvement in poverty levels since 1992 (Cooke, Hague, and
McKay 2016 ). The project districts are ranked very low on UNICEF ’s(2016 ) District League Table
Report (UNICEF and Ghana Centre for Democratic Development 2016 ). Of the 215 districts in
Ghana, the Youth Speak Up project ’s target districts in Northern Ghana are ranked 207, 192, 136,
and 111.
According to a 2010 World Bank analysis on t he efficiency and effectiveness of Ghana’ se d u -
cation sector, the poor in Northern Ghana receive less than 30% of Ghana ’sn a t i o n a lr e s o u r c e s
per school-age pupil compared to thei r southern counterparts (World Bank 2010). This results in
inadequate educational infrastructure and poor-quality education due to a lack of qualified and
committed teachers in deprived areas. Also, as the Northern Region is primarily rural, young
people have limited access to employment in the f ormal sector and have to seek jobs in the infor-
mal sector or pursue self-employment. Few youn g people in the north consider farming an attrac-
tive option, because they lack access to produc tive resources, land, skills, and marketing
opportunities. This has resulted in a massive migration of young people to the south where
they, often unsuccessfully, seek better opportunities.
However, the youth are also one of the main drivers of future change, and more political attention
has been given to developing their capacities and support structures for their active participation inGhana ’s development. In 2010 the Government of Ghana launched a National Youth Policy, which
emphasised the institutionalisation of youth participation at all levels of decision-making and the
empowerment of young people to participate in productive activities. However, government
funding is insufficient for these ambitions, and initiatives to improve the conditions for youth arestill highly dependent on financial support from donors and donor-supported civil society organis-
ations. The YSU project can be seen in the light of these constraints.
Youth are socially, politically, and economically marginalised at all levels, from the home to the
institutional level, especially in rural communities, which make up the majority of the deprived North-ern Region. Youth tend to be excluded from discussions that concern them and their future, and are
poorly represented at all levels of decision-making structures in the community and beyond. Pos-itions of power in Ghana, and in Northern Ghana in particular, are culturally related to age, and
the significant respect for elders tends to leave youth without the courage and self-esteem to air
their views in the presence of elderly people, and with limited legitimate space to do so (Korboe2014 ).
Gender inequality strongly influences the possibilities of girls and young women. At its root are
cultural and religious norms and social practices, such as early marriage of girls, expectations oflarge families, and lack of access to land and productive resources. Women ’s participation in
decision-making is low at all levels and they rarely hold leadership positions. Their opportunitiesfor participation are influenced by poorer levels of education, heavier workloads, and deeplyentrenched patriarchal structures.
2402 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEAccess to and use of radio, mobile phones, and social media
Radio is the main source of information and news for over 80% of the population in the Northern
Region, with only about 15% reading newspapers (Ghana Statistical Service 2012 ). There are 13,
mainly commercial, radio stations. Access to mobile phones has expanded extremely quickly inGhana over the past decade and by the first quarter of 2017 mobile voice subscriptions had a
total penetration rate of 139% (National Communications Authority 2017a ).
Mobile data subscribers in Ghana have also increased rapidly (National Communications Authority
2017b ) and mayor telecoms offer 4G networks in most parts of Ghana. However, the distribution of inter-
net access is highly unbalanced between north and south Ghana, with an average of 42% access in Accra
Region and 2.4% in Northern Region, and still only a small proportion of the population have access (Inter-net World Stats 2017 ). In regards to social media, Facebook and WhatsApp have the largest share of users
and are often preinstalled on simple and accessible phones. Twitter remains the least used social media,with 293,000 Twitter accounts registered in Ghana in 2015 (Social@Oglivey 2015 )
Very few youth in the Northern Region have access to internet and mobile phones, and have very
limited skills in using new media. Girls in particular have less access to mobile phones and web-basedservices such as social media platforms (GSS 2012 , 112 –118).
The Youth Speak Up project
YSU targets four districts in the Northern Region of Ghana. In each district the project collaborates
with a local youth organisation in which the participants are anchored to ensure local ownership
and structures that can support the continuation of the project ’s activities. In the YSU project,
these youth organisations have been instrumental in mobilising young people and providing a foun-
dation for their work, and the project ’s direct participants were selected from these organisations.
Youth change agents
The primary target group is approximately 150 young people consisting of 25 community journalists
and 125 listener club members distributed across five listener clubs. These young people are strate-
gically trained in areas such as civic education, citizen journalism, radio production and broadcasting,
social media, and resource mobilisation. The secondary target group is local youth centres in the fourdistricts, representing approximately 15 youth groups and an average of 170 young people per
centre, who support the community journalists in identifying issues. They receive tutoring in the
use of social media and advocacy from the participants.
Community journalists
The community journalists are at the forefront of the project, whose main responsibility is to highlight
issues and engage relevant duty bearers through radio, social media, and community dialogues. They
work closely with the listener clubs. Community journalists receive training in citizen journalism, civiceducation, and advocacy to develop their critical thinking skills and ability to identify problems and
solutions relevant to them. The citizen journalism training is done over a six-month course, with eight
training modules, before they are ready to start radio production. Community journalists are trainedby the local organisation Rural Media Network, which has extensive experience in training commu-
nity or citizen journalists in radio and print media.
3
Listener clubs
Listener clubs (LCs) are created from existing youth organisations and are the activist base from which
the community journalists receive support to conduct their activities. LC members listen to and discussDEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 403the radio programmes and contribute by making call-ins, text messages, or using WhatsApp during the
programme, contributing to the discussions, and bringing attention to additional areas that need to becovered. They are trained in conducting dialogue sessions to identify issues and solutions, and how to
develop action plans to address the issues raised on radio. As local youth activists they take part in
creating awareness on the issues in the communities, and they help the community journalists indoing research and gathering information about injustices affecting them.
The participants are trained in using social media by the local organisation Hopin Academy. Youth
Empowerment for Life conducts advocacy and community dialogue training, and all three localimplementing organisations provide ongoing supervision and monitoring.
Youth radio for and by youth
Once a week, the community journalists lead a one-hour radio session in the four local radio stations,where they bring attention to the issues they have identified as most pressing for the development oftheir communities. The programmes are usually conducted in the local languages, and they invite
relevant stakeholders to join the programme and discuss the development issues. The youth use
social media to reinforce the issues addressed on air.
Partnerships are established with four local community radio stations and one regional radio
station that host the weekly youth radio programmes. The radio stations provide resource personswho support the community journalists in radio broadcasting, but the main responsibility of present-ing lies with the youth ( Figure 1 ).
As outlined above, YSU capitalises on the current dynamic media developments in Ghana to
develop a communication-centred youth empowerment initiative, which responds to and challengesthe situation of youth in Northern Ghana. In the following section we discuss the analytical framework
which guides our analysis of their communication intervention.
Analytical framework
In a sub-Saharan African context, empirical media studies are achieving growing academic focus
(Tenhunen 2013 ; Willems and Mano 2017 ; Ndlela and Tufte 2017 ). It is evident that digital media
are influencing social relations and social dynamics and providing new opportunities for citizensto engage in public debate. Nevertheless, limited attention is being given to the relationshipsbetween media development, media use, communication practices, and processes of youth-led
social change in the sub-Saharan region. Our research questions address these issues.
Previous studies have focused on relations between gender and mobile telephones (Tenhunen
2013 ; Gustafsson and Nielsen 2017 ), entrepreneurship and mobile telephone use (Tufte 2017b ), or
digital empowerment (Wildermuth 2013 ). However, there is still a very limited body of knowledge
exploring cultures of governance, and in particular the role strategic communication interventions
can have in enhancing processes of social change. In pursing this analysis, we have developed an
analytical framework which combines a theorisation of the notion of “cultures of governance ”with
the concepts of empowerment and citizen media.
Cultures of governance
The Mexican cultural theorist Jorge Gonzalez provides the notion of “cibercultur@ ”(adapted by Tufte
to“cultures of governance ”,2017a ). This is a culturally embedded theorisation of the relationship
between information systems, communication practices, and knowledge production (Gonzalez
2014 ). Cibercultur@ is about the ability for a community to govern from below (Gonzalez 2014 ). Gon-
zalez understands technology as a social vector; a force for social energy where the information –com-
munication nexus necessarily must be connected to the dimension of knowledge: “Knowledge is not
just about accessing or handling information created and diffused by others, about others …Knowledge404 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEis…a complex process of neurological, psychological and social activity that increases our capacity to
differentiate and integrate lived experience ”(Gonzalez 2014 , 31). Knowledge thereby becomes
crucial in our struggles to gain control over our own lives. Such struggles are at the heart of the
efforts of the youth in Northern Ghana.
Figure 1. Organisation of the Youth Speak Up project.DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 405Analysing cultures of governance is about analysing the social processes and cultural practices
whereby information systems and communication practices enhance emergent local knowledge
communities. This analytical approach to social change in Northern Ghana enables us to analyse
how a project such as YSU is empowering, or not, a historically marginalised group in society, the
youth. It invites us to explore how YSU, by supporting the youth in their efforts to challengepower structures, hierarchies, and social roles, enhances the emergence of a new kind of local knowl-
edge communities in which youth can claim their right to have a much more articulate role in any
decision-making and community development process that impacts upon their lives.
Gonzalez argues that “to develop cibercultur@ really means redesigning collectively –and from the
bottom-up –a different attitude to and way of relating to technology and social problems ”(Gonzalez
2014 , 40). The agenda becomes to:
“address information needs, to generate and evaluate knowledge and to coordinate communication actions that
can break the vicious circle of technological dependence and subaltern representations that conform to symbolic
ecologies …It will entail a coordinated effort to reweave the unbalanced social bonds. ”(Gonzalez 2014 , 40)
In Northern Ghana such unbalanced social bonds are found in the asymmetric distribution of power
in society, reflected in the subservient positions of youth in decision-making, in media production,
and in society in general. Our assumption is that the YSU project plays a key role in reweaving
some of the existing unbalanced social bonds. Consequently, the “culture of governance ”approach
enables us to understand how marginalised communities handle situations of injustice.
Four degrees of empowerment
Gonzalez ’s notion of technologies as social vectors corresponds well with a participatory and bottom-
up understanding of communication for development. It offers an approach to development that isneither techno-centric nor linear. It ties quite well with Kleine ’s notion of technologies of choice and
her typology of four degrees of empowerment (Kleine 2013 ). Kleine ’s framework of ICT and empow-
erment emphasises the ability to choose. It is an action-oriented approach about making the bestchoices in the personal, social, political, cultural, and economic spheres. Kleine connects “making
choices ”to processes of empowerment and in particular to community development, suggesting
four degrees of empowerment, ranging from the existence of choice over the sense of choice andthe use of choice, to the achievement of choice. It is our assumption that the youth participating in
YSU are participating in a process whereby they undergo a gradual transformation in at least their
own perception of empowerment that moves them from a perception of limited existence ofchoice and all the way to the achievement of choice. Our analysis will delve into this assumption.
While Kleine ’s perspectives are inspired by Amartya Sen ’s capabilities approach, she also articu-
lates some critiques towards his notion of capabilities as not sufficiently attentive to questions ofpower or social constraints (Kleine 2013 , 29). What Kleine and Gonzalez have very much in
common is recognising the power dynamics of everyday life along with the cultural dynamics influ-encing the way of conceiving technologies as social vectors that potentially can articulate processesof empowerment. Given the patriarchal and hierarchical power structures in Northern Ghanaian
society, Gonzalez and Kleine help us unpack the social dynamics sparked by the Youth Speak Up
project.
Citizen media
Complementing the analytical focus provided by Gonzalez and Kleine upon cultures of governanceand processes of empowerment, the notion of citizen media adds an important layer of analysis to
this case study. The notion of citizen media offers the opportunity to analyse the role of the media in
development and particularly the media and communication initiatives that allow youth a space andplace for deliberation on their own terms. Rodriquez characterises the process of developing citizens ’406 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEmedia as: (1) that a collectivity is enacting its citizenship by actively intervening and transforming the
established mediascape; (2) that these media are contesting social codes legitimised identities andinstitutionalised social relations; (3) that these communication practices are empowering the commu-
nity involved, to the point where these transformations and changes are possible (Rodriguez 2001 ,
20). In our case study, citizen media are developed through community dialogue, through investiga-
tive journalism, the development of stories, and through youth ’s participation in the community radio
programmes. Citizens ’media can ultimately give voice to the voiceless, in this case the youth, and
prompt them to speak out about their concern by fostering empowerment and awareness raising,so people trust their own potential to act.
Research design and methodology
The case study was designed to shed light upon all three research questions: what are the possibilitiesand limitations of strategic communication initiatives to enhance a culture of governance amongyouth in Northern Ghana? To which degree does the strategic use of communication catalyse a trans-
formation in the participating youth ’s perception of agency and empowerment? What is the causal
relation between the chosen forms of communicative engagement designed by the Youth Speak Up
project and the identified social change processes?
To answer these questions we draw on both quantitative and qualitative data. The first dataset
was the pre- and post-intervention surveys. A baseline survey was conducted in October to Novem-ber 2015, shortly after project implementation began (YEfL 2015 ), and an endline survey was con-
ducted in May to June 2017, four months before the project ended. One hundred and twenty-fouryouth from all four selected districts participated in the baseline, representing the primary targetgroup in the project –listener club members and community journalists. The baseline was conducted
by the project staff in collaboration with a Danish Master’s student and Ghana Friends. Project staffconducted the endline survey. For both baseline and endline surveys, the questions were largelyfocused upon exploring the perceptions and experiences of youth in citizen engagement and advo-
cacy processes, as well as basic data about media access and uses.
To complement the baseline and endline surveys, an MA thesis was produced exploring the first
experiences of the citizen journalists and their perceptions of the added value participating in thisproject had for them (Kristensen 2016 ). YEfL, the coordinating organisation, produced seven quarterly
reports (2017 ). The experiences from the districts were assembled in “change stories” , a key com-
ponent of these quarterly reports. Finally, we also assessed the project document ( 2014 ), partner
meeting reports, and curriculum for the training conducted with citizen journalists.
Together, the datasets produced by the organisation gave valuable insights into the activities
carried out, offering a fundamental understanding of the YSU project activities and results. In par-ticular, their focus group discussions (FGDs) and some of the qualitative answers from the
endline survey gave very useful insights into the youth ’s perceptions of the project ’s value to them-
selves and their communities. The change stories were useful in documenting some of the tangible
changes achieved in the communities. However, as always, when depending on data produced by
the organisation carrying out the activities, it cannot be taken at face value, but must be analysed inlight of the interests and bias inherent in all phases, from design, collection, to presentation in final
reports and stories.
The other dataset analysed was collected by us during a nine-day field trip carried out between 8
and 16 June 2017. We visited all four districts, and carried out a total of four FGDs with all activecitizen journalists (a total of 24). This key source allowed us to explore in depth how the youth experi-
enced their participation in the project, and the individual and community outcomes it had. TheseFGDs were complemented by interviews with managing directors, programme managers, and pro-
gramme hosts from three of the four radio stations broadcasting YSU programmes, and participatory
observation during one live radio broadcasting. We also conducted four FGDs with listener clubmembers (a total of 45), and interviewed, in pairs, eight key stakeholders (districts councilDEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 407members, assembly men, and representatives from health and educational district services). The-
matic analysis was employed, focusing on the topics embedded in the two research sub-questions.
Youth-led processes of social change: practices, perceptions, and dynamics
The following analysis explores the possibilities and limitations of strategic communication initiatives
to enhance a culture of governance among the youth participating in the YSU project.
New choices, actions, and agency
To answer our research question we explored how the youth perceived themselves and their role in
community development or social change before the project started, and whether or not these per-
ceptions have changed on account of the project initiatives. Have their sense of agency and empow-
erment changed? The situation analysis and baseline survey data show that the youth participantswere feeling disempowered, lacking choice, space, and ability to change their own situation. Only
7–9% of the participants related their role as citizens to participation in decision-making (YEfL
2015 , 15). One community journalist also stated that: “Before the project I was nobody …”(CJ, District
B).
Following the 18 –19 months from baseline to endline survey, most youth responding to the
endline survey and interviewed in our FGDs clearly expressed that they have significantly increased
their participation in public debate and community decision-making, and expressed a strong belief in
their own agency:
“Two years ago even identifying an issue was a challenge but now it is easy. I was not even …interest[ed] in any
issue affecting my community, but through the training from this project, I have developed much interest on
community issues and even some members bring issues at my doorstep for advocacy activities. ”(CJ, District B,
endline survey)
This was backed by one of the female community journalist stating that:
“Being part of the project, I have learnt a lot as an individual. Before, it was difficult for me to stand in front of a
crowd to say something meaningful. Now I …know so many things. I have the courage to go on air, to take big
decisions and even to go to many district offices where they would not allow me before. Now I can go anywhere
and seek any information. ”(CJ, District B)
The statements above illustrate our overall impressions from the focus groups –that the youth
expressed in very engaged terms that their experience as citizen journalists was very positive.
Despite logistical constraints such as lack of transport or suf ﬁcient phone credit making their job dif-
ﬁcult, and the fact that they volunteer substantial time, their experience in interacting in dialogue
with the communities and their new relations with the many stakeholders and local media housesall contributed to what we interpret as quite a profound transformation of self-perception withregards to agency. Their statements generally seemed to re ﬂect very positive experiences in these
interactions and in achieving both tangible and intangible results. This seemed to be highly motiv-ating for them.
When analysing these transformations from the perspective of Kleine ’s“degrees of empower-
ment ”, it was evident that the youth have moved from having limited choice to engage in spheres
of influence to having a sense of choice, where they believed in their collective efficacy to act ineveryday life, and using that choice to influence their own lives and that of their communities.
The youth stress that it is specifically the newfound technologies and communication practices
that have increased their opportunities to influence decision-making and development.
4
An example of this can be seen where one group of community journalists, during their research
on how to better the conditions for people with disabilities (PWDs), became aware that 2% of thedistrict common fund should formally be allocated to PWDs. Unaware of this policy, PWDs in the dis-trict had been living without much support from the District Assembly. The community journalists408 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEraised the issue on regional radio, sharing the policy with people throughout the region. People
called in to share their contributions, and it became clear that many PWDs in the Northern Regionwere not aware of this policy. The response from the duty bearers was swift. The District Chief Execu-
tive of the district called in during the programme and invited the community journalists to a
meeting at the District Assembly. Afterwards, the funds for PWDs were released, and the communityjournalists and LC members took the initiative to develop forms to make it easier for PWDs to apply
for the funds. Because of this effort, PWDs can now apply for funds to support, for example, their edu-
cation, businesses, and farming activities.
Such examples support the overall impression of the YSU communication initiative enhancing
both a transformation the youth ’s perception of agency and empowerment. It also illustrates the
very particular value they attributed to the new opportunities offered by their active and increasinglycompetent engagement with both new (social media) and old (community radio) media. As such, it
illustrates how the new technologies, in accordance with Gonzalez ’s perception of new technologies,
become social vectors that changed the youth ’s possibilities and power. New information systems
were developed in the creative synergy between investigative journalism carried out by theseyoung community journalists, their community dialogues, and their active use of social media plat-
forms in dynamic coordination with their community radio broadcasting, all coming together toenhance new communication practices, and ultimately, the production of new knowledge about
the community, its needs, and aspirations.
This change in possibilities and power emerging from the youth ’s new communication capacities
and the new information systems was one of the most significant changes that we observed duringour fieldwork. For the youth to have been engaged in both developing and producing citizen media
in various forms shows how they were able to challenge the existing mediascape, contest establishedsocial practices, and revisit and redefine their own identities and relations with others. These young
community journalists and LC members, as well as their communities, experienced new positions of
power in relation to duty bearers and authorities.
Youth, citizen media, and empowerment
The youth in Northern Region have not previously had specific youth radio programmes produced byyouth, or the skills to use mobile phones, social media, and strategic dialogue. With the project sup-
porting the youth to be producers of citizen media they have created a new mediascape, where
youth not only have new outlets but also audiences that go beyond the youth and their nearestcommunities.
Changing existing social practices are often difficult as they are embedded in the social and cul-
tural structures of a society. We observed that the new information system available to the youth andtheir communication capacity resulted in several examples of the youth using these to address nega-
tive social practices. One example was the issue of teenage pregnancies.
A major problem facing the development of young women in Northern Ghana is teenage preg-
nancies leading to early marriage and school dropout. One community had recorded 16 teenagepregnancies in 2016. A key contributing factor is the socially approved practice whereby female stu-
dents assist male teachers with their household chores. In this community the local youth associ-ations identified the issue of a high rate of teenage pregnancies and decided address it on radio
and social media. During the research, the community journalists revealed that male teachers
were abusing female students assisting them at their houses. They brought the issue to the schoolprincipal and invited him to participate in a radio discussion. The delicate subject was broached
on radio, underscoring women’s right to say no and not be sexually abused, and highlighting tea-
chers exploiting students. In the aftermath of the programmes, school management in the commu-nities took an active role in solving the problem, dismissing two male teachers, leading to a significant
decrease in teenage pregnancies.DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 409The story demonstrates that youth associations were able to identify an injustice, develop a strat-
egy for tackling it, and use different citizen media to do so. Generally, we found that the youth –as a
result of stronger collective efficacy –were not afraid to tackle longstanding practices and that they
felt an obligation to do so, as they were now in a new position to help their communities.
It was clear from the research that the community journalists achieved a new status in their com-
munities, among their community peers, and newfound recognition from decision-makers, both the
chiefs and elders in the traditional governance system, but equally those of the formal local govern-
ance system: “I have gained confidence and fluency in issue discussions. With the new knowledge and
skills, I feel motivated and also educated with contributions from people in my radio programme ”(CJ, C).
Others shared similar experiences:
“Now, [I am] very fluent to speak in public and my education level has improved significantly. People see me as a
role model and someone who is ready to change the community. Yes, at first I was nobody in the community. But
now I am highly popular and respected in the community for the work I am doing. ”(CJ, D)
“The people look at me as a big man with authority. Yes, before the project I was nobody, but now any meeting
they have in the community they make sure they involve me …My status in the community has totally changed
as compared to previous. ”(CJ, E)
Such conversations documented that youth participants had gained both voice and platform to
address issues deﬁ ned as unjust to them. They were also succeeding in engaging stakeholders
and decision-makers in public debates about the identi ﬁed themes. As for the platforms they devel-
oped, in particular the radio platform with phone-in opportunities had made a signi ﬁcant difference
in the local community. Furthermore, we saw evidence of the youth developing online platforms toreach national media and the general public, and network with each other and with key
stakeholders.
Our conversations with power holders and duty bearers also revealed that their view of the youth
had changed during the project, from not seeing them as valuable players in community develop-ment to instigating collaborations with them, not least because of their new abilities to produce
citizen media.
One example of this was around poor-quality education. In District A we met with the Ghana Edu-
cation Service (GES) District Commissioner, who explained how the youth community journalists andgroups had helped to reduce teacher and student absenteeism in the district. He and the GES hadobserved the problem and contacted the community journalists to take up the issue on the radio.
He is a regular listener of the programmes and explained: “Many people in the district speak very posi-
tively about the radio programmes .”After having contacted the youth journalists he joined the radio
discussions where the issues and solutions were discussed, both on air with phone-ins and on socialmedia platforms following the programmes. The youth also conducted face-to-face and drama
awareness activities in the communities, stressing the fact that parents have an obligation to sendtheir children to school. These interactions across several levels resulted in the district executive com-
mittee passing a new by-law stating that all children above five should be enrolled in school. The GES
District Commissioner attributed the actions by the youth journalists as a significant contribution tothis change.
The high-level recognition can also be seen in tangible ways. Many community journalists and LC
members are now invited to District Assembly meetings, several have direct contact with the highestgovernance position in the districts, and some have taken positions on district committees.
Causal relations between media, communication, and social change
As our review and analysis of some of YSU ’s change stories have documented, there are dynamic
relations between the components of the project. The various elements are clearly integral partsof the overall communication for social change strategy of the YSU project. Our analysis leads usto conclude that the suggested strategy works in the sense that there are clear causal relations410 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEbetween the elements. The young community journalists take on their role as agenda-setters, engage
in dialogue with their communities, and gain clout and responsibility in the process. Additionally,their self-perception changes from that of a more passive community member to that of an active
community member with powers and opportunities to influence the course of development.
The community journalists have managed to get their investigated and documented stories into
the mediated public sphere on community radio, but also onto social media platforms andonwards occasionally into national media. This has sparked a long series of social dynamics.
What the enhanced processes tells us is that technologies introduced into the lives of these com-munity journalists and listener club members become social vectors, indicating that social
dynamics are sparked, power relations challenged and shifted, and a series of tangible develop-
ment outcomes achieved. The growing sense of empowerment is apparent, both among the par-ticipating youth and also among the communities that see the results emerging from these
collective processes.
Sustained social change
How to anchor the above examples and profit from them in a strategic way in the future remains a
core challenge for the youth and the NGOs involved in the project. If systemic changes beyond the
communities are to be achieved a series of issues must be addressed. Despite the positive evidence
found, there are factors that can challenge, slow down, or divert the achieved results.
The small-scale YSU project is deeply rooted in existing long-term programmes and partnerships
between North –South and South –South organisations. This has given the interventions a solid plat-
form to operate from and knowledge of the local context, ensuring that the project is adapted to theneeds of the youth. The youth have also received additional support from the sister programme
Empowerment for Life in building stronger civil society organisations and advocacy. It would have
been difficult to achieve the same results without the synergies and support from a larger long-term programme.
The sustainability of a project like this is, however, as in many cases with development projects,
the Achilles heel. Will the radio programmes be able to continue without external financialsupport and will the youth have the same drive when the project staff no longer supports them?
Throughout the project the collaboration with the radio stations has been developed and they are
very supportive of the youth programming, but many of them are commercially driven and chal-lenged financially.
Lastly, the number of youth benefitting from this intervention is very limited (24 community jour-
nalists and 150 LC members), which leaves many youth still vulnerable, and many migrate to study orwork. The target participants are anchored in youth groups, and training-of-trainers methodologies
are applied to ensure some reach to these groups, but the risk of creating “islands of excellence ”still
prevail, challenging sustainability.
Enhancing a culture of governance
In conclusion, we found that the nature of this project has opened up a more dynamic understandingof social change, where the emphasis is on the creative, proactive enactment of citizen engagement,
and that it creates space and capability of the youth to do so. Examining these social processes fromthe perspectives of “cultures of governance ”, we have found, first, that new information systems have
been established through community radios and social media; and second, a broad range of newcommunication practices have been developed, both through new information systems, but alsoin the developing relations between youth activists and decision-makers. Finally, the outcome of
both the citizen journalist research processes and especially the sharing of stories through the
new information systems and communication practices, have led to a broadening and intensifiedpublic debate and to the production of new local knowledge.DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 411In terms of systemic social change, we found that a reweaving of the previously very unbalanced
social bonds in these local communities have and continue to occur, where youth have gained clout,
doors to decision-makers have opened, youth have been listened to, and have also been invited to
participate in decision-making systems within these local communities. All this seems to be happen-
ing thanks to the combination of trained youth with new capacities to communicate and act,strengthened youth organisations, and the broad public debate and growing community involve-
ment that we have identified.
However, these achievements do not come without pitfalls. While the intensity of the tangible out-
comes and the illustrious change stories may reduce somewhat when the external funds dry out,possibly the most sustainable element of this project is the degree of empowerment achieved,
not only at the individual level of the limited number of community journalists, but in broadersectors of the communities where community conversations have intensified, power relations
have shifted, and cultures of governance have grown. While this case study comes with limitations
regarding time of immersion and depth of analysis, our analysis points towards the strong potentialof communication for social change initiatives that engage strategically and systematically with the
communicative opportunities inherent in a society. As the Ugandan philosopher Mahmood Mamdani
said in critically assessing the role of civil society in African development processes, the focus oughtnot to be on developing a civil society vis-à-vis the state, but to engage local groups and associations
to act according to their needs (Mamdani 1996 , 3). This, we found, was achieved in these commu-
nities in Northern Ghana.
Notes
1. This is done through a media and communication-oriented project funded by Denmark ’s Ingathering and the
Danish NGO, Ghana Friends. It is implemented in the Northern Region by three local organisations, YEfL,
Hopin Academy, and Rural Media Network (RUMNET). While this specific project ran for only two years (April2015 to October 2017) YEfL has been working with youth in Northern Ghana since 2010, and the partnership
between Ghana Friends and local associations and organisations has existed since 1986 in a variety of
collaborations.
2. The gender parity index for primary education is 0.94; and in rural areas only 29% of women are literate compared
to 52% of men.
3. According to the implementing organisations, citizen or community journalism are used interchangeably and
have the same meaning. For them it is a question of using the most relatable term for their target groups.
4. Data from the endline survey, FGDs from fieldwork.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes on contributors
Lise Grauenkaer is a Program Coordinator at Ghana Friendship, Denmark.
Thomas Tufte is a Professor in the School of Media, Communication and Sociology, University of Leicester, UK.
References
Cooke, E., S. Hague, and A. McKay. 2016 .The Ghana Poverty and Inequality Report: Using the 6th Ghana Living Standards
Survey . Accra: Art Excel Gh.
Ghana Statistical Service. 2012 .2010 Population and Housing Census –Summary Report of Final Results . Accra: Ghana
Statistical Service.
Gonzalez, J. 2014 .“Researching and Developing Cybercultur@: Emerging Local Knowledge Communities in Latin
America. ”InReclaiming the Public Sphere, Communication, Power and Social Change , edited by T. Askanius, and L.
Stubbe Østergaard, 26– 46. London: Palgrave Macmillan.412 L. GRAUENKAER AND T. TUFTEGustafsson, J., and P. E. Nielsen. 2017 .“Changing Communication Ecologies in Rural, Peri-Urban and Urban Kenya. ”
Journal of African Media Studies 9 (2): 291 –306.
Gyampo, R. 2012 .“Youth Participation in Youth Programmes: The Case of Ghana ’s National Youth Employment
Programme. ”Journal of Pan African Studies 5 (5): 13– 28.
Internet World Stats. 2017 .“Internet Users in Africa, June 2017. ”Accessed November 1, 2017. www.internetworldstats.
com/stats1.htm.
Kleine, D. 2013 .Technologies of Choice? ICTs, Development, and the Capabilities Approach. The Information Society Series.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Korboe, D. 2014 .Youth Development Interventions in Ghana: Policy and Practice . Report prepared for Education for
Empowerment (EfE) Programme. Accra: IBIS Ghana.
Kristensen, P. 2016 .Communication for Social Change in Northern Ghana . Roskilde: Roskilde University.
Mamdani, M. 1996 .Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa in the Legacy of Late Colonialism . London: James Currey.
National Communications Authority. 2017a .“Voice Statistics. ”Accessed November 1, 2017. https://nca.org.gh/industry-
data-2/market-share-statistics-2/voice-2/ .
National Communications Authority. 2017b .“Data Statistics. ”Accessed November 1, 2017. https://nca.org.gh/industry-
data-2/market-share-statistics-2/data-3/ .
Ndlela, M. N., and T. Tufte. 2017 .“Making Sense and Use of New Media in Sub-Saharan Africa. ”Journal of African Media
Studies 9 (2): 243 –246.
Rodriguez, C. 2001 .Fissures in the Mediascape. An International Study of Citizens ’Media . Cresskill: Hampton Press.
Social@Oglivey. 2015 .“Social Media in Africa. ”Accessed November 1, 2017. https://social.ogilvy.com/wp-content/
uploads/Social-Media-in-Africa_Infographic.pdf.
Tenhune n,
S.2013 .“Introduction: Mobile Technology, Gender and Development. ”SUOMEN Anthropology Special Issue:
Mobile Telephony and Gender in the Developing World 38 (1): 4– 11.
Tufte, T. 2017a .Communication and Social Change –A Citizen Perspective . Cambridge: Polity.
Tufte, T. 2017b .“‘Hustler Lives ’and Digital Dilemmas in Kenya: Young men Negotiating Work Opportunities, Life
Aspirations and Mobile Phone Use. ”Journal of African Media Studies 9 (2): 261 –276.
UNICEF and Ghana Centre for Democratic Development. 2016 .Ghana District League Table 2016 Report . New York:
UNICEF.
Wildermuth, N. 2013 .“Information and Communication Technology-Facilitated E-Citizenship, E-Democracy and Digital
Empowerment in Kenya. The Opportunities and Constraints of Community-Based Initiatives. ”InSpeaking Up and
Talking Back? Media, Empowerment and Civic Engagement among East and Southern African Youth , edited by T.
Tufte, et al. 55– 80. Nordicom: University of Gothenburg.
Willems, W., and W. Mano, eds. 2017 .Everyday Media Cultures in Africa. Audiences and Users . London: Routledge.
World Bank. 2010 .Education in Ghana: Improving Equity, Efficiency and Accountability of Education Service Delivery . Africa
Education Country Status Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Youth Empowerment for Life (YEfL). 2014 .Project Document . Tamale: YEfL.
Youth Empowerment for Life (YEfL). 2015 .Baseline Survey 2015. Tamale: YEfL.
Youth Empowerment for Life (YEfL). 2017 .Quarterly Reports 2015– 2017 . Tamale: YEfL.DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 413
View publication stats