145 JPPI Vol 10 No 2 (2020 ) 145 - 156 
Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika  
32a/E/KPT/2017  
 
e-ISSN 2476 -9266  
p-ISSN: 2088 -9402  
 
Doi:10.17933/jppi.20 20.100205 
 
A Study on the Potential of the Development of Software Applications 
and Digital Content Industrial Ecosystem in Indonesia  
 
Studi Potensi Pengembangan Ekosistem Industri Aplikasi Perangkat 
Lunak dan Konten Digital di Indonesia  
 
Ahmad Budi Setiawan  
Puslitb ang APTIKA & IKP, Badan Litbang SDM. Kementerian Kominfo.  
Jl. Medan Merdeka Barat No. 9 Jakarta 10110. Telp./Fax.: 021 -3800418  
e-mail: ahma003@kominfo.go.id   
 
Received : 11 November  2020 ; Received in revised from : 9 December  2020 ; Accepted : 10 December  2020  
 
Abstract  
 
The phenomenon of digitalization has cha nged human civilization at a very massive level in various aspects of life. In 
line with the advancement of ICT, so have the development of innovation and the software and digital content industry. 
Competition in the software industry is starting to develo p. The ability to increase companies’  production is chang ing 
significantly . Industry competition in the globalization process requires existing companies to be able to develop 
industrial capabilities with all industrial models and policies. The role of the government remains  an important factor in 
creating an environment in which the domestic telematics industry can gain a competitive advantage. This study aims to 
map the potential of the digital content and software application industry in Indonesia. This study is conducted 
qualitatively through literature studies. The study produces a mapping of the potential for the software and digital content 
industry in Indonesia. This study recommends increasing the capacity of human resources in the field of ICT and further 
regulatory support to support the growth of the software and digital content industry in Indonesia.  
 
Keywords : Potential Development, Industry, Software Applications, Digital C ontent . 
 
  
Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
146  INTRODUCTION  
 
Background  
Along with the rapid development of 
information and communication technology, the 
phenomenon of digitalization has changed human 
civilization at a very massive level in various 
aspects of life. In this era, anyone who is not 
responsiv e to adopting technology will slowly be 
left behind by newer and more advanced 
technology. This,  of course , affects business 
behavior and global economic conditions  
massively , leading to the birth of the digital 
economy.  
The digital economy is a new resour ce that 
Indonesia has. The development of the digital 
economy era rests on the birth and growth of 
entrepreneurs whose bases are talents, ideas , and 
digital technology to produce innovation s. These 
entrepreneurs are known as Digitalpreneurs. 
Developing  innovations is very complex with not 
easy implementation,  because no companies or 
innovators are experts in all fields . For this reason, 
collaborat ion is needed between  several different 
skills and knowledge.  
In the future, economic players must be 
able to em ploy the  technology, especially digital 
technology. Factors that can support this 
development are the use of technology and 
improv ement of  the quality of Indonesia's human 
capital . In fact, according to PWC data in February 
2017, Indonesia is predicted to be ranked 5th in the 
world's largest economy by 2030 (PWC, 2017).  
Indonesia  has an enormous market 
potential, supported by Presidential Instruction to 
promote Digital Transformation  to accommodate 
the rapid development of ICT in Indonesia . In fact,  in 2001 , a new Ministry was established to regulate 
the ICT sector through a Presidential Decree. 
Then, in 2008 , a new Law on Internet application 
and content was promulgated , namely Law 
Number 11 of 2008 on Electronic Information and 
Transaction ( ITE Law, 2008),  which was later 
amended by Law  Number 19 of 2016  (ITE Law, 
2016) .  Based on data from the  Industry Ministry’s 
Directorate of Electronics and Telematics Industry, 
currently only 20% of software industry business 
players are local players , the rest are fore ign 
players . However,  the potential of local software 
developers continues to increase  from year to year,  
proven by domestic software market opportunity 
which reaches 110 million dollars per year 
(Warsito, 2015). The weak competitiveness of the 
local soft ware industry which has previously been 
mentioned occurred because there is no standard of 
a process model for the maturity of the domestic 
software industry  in place . Seeing the above 
phenomena and the increasing potential for local 
software developers fr om year to year, the 
government is encouraged to immediately establish 
regulations and standards that can promote  the 
local software and content industry growth and 
development. The policies and standards 
established must be based on tested  methodolog ies 
and go through  extensive best practice s to be able 
to find a method most suitable to the conditions in 
the country (Wijaya, 2008).  
The potential for the software market is 
enormous  and can reach US$ 600 million per year. 
Currently, many millennials develop software 
content s personally and sold them  to Apple Store 
or Google Play Store (Ministry of Industry, 2017). 
With such potential, the Government is target ting 
investment in the telematics industry to reach a A Study On The Potential Of The Development Of Software Applications And Digital Content … (Ahmad Budi S etiawan ) 
  
 147 
 minimum of US$ 60 million per year. This target 
is enforced in accordance with the government’s 
local content requirement  (TKDN) of smart 
phones. If not managed properly, the nation's great 
potential will not be able to enter the industrial 
world in dire of  engineering  talents . What the 
nation has now i s untapped  potential waiting to be 
further exploited for the  industry.  
Based on the aforementioned problems, 
the formulation of the problem that becomes the 
question in this study is how to exploit the 
potential for the development of the content 
industry and ICT applications based on innovation 
and creative industries to increase the ir 
contribution to the national economy?  
 
 
 Literatur e Review  
Literature relevant to the object of the 
study is the policy and governance of software and 
content applications in order to design  a strategy 
for developing domestic software and content 
industry as a driver of digital economy in 
Indonesia.   
 
Definition s and Industry Classification s of 
Software Applications and Digital Content  
Based on the Annex "Guide to measuring 
the information society" (2005), the OECD has 
defined the ICT group and also emphasizes the 
intersection between information technology, 
telecommunications and information content 
activities within a company or organization .  
 
 
 
Figure  1. Group of  ICT Activities  
The content industry is then referred to as 
something different, although it is complementary 
to the ICT sector. The definition of ICT is "those 
industries which facilitate, by electronic means, the 
processing, transmission , and display of 
information". This definition does not explicitly 
include industries that produce information or what are then called the content industry. The content 
industry is divided into three types,  namely :  
1. Multimedia Creator, which is digital 
content creator that combines sound, data, 
and video -based materials with the 
majority of application functions in the 
entertainment, social , and friendship fields;  Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
148  2. E-Commerce Creator, namely digital 
content creator that also combines voice, 
data, and video -based material  with or 
stands alone from most application 
functions in the trading, commercial , and 
business fields; and  
3. Publishing Creator, which is digital content 
creator which also combines sound, data 
and video -based material with or stands 
alone from the majority of ap plication 
functions in the fields of information, 
news, and its derivatives .  
 
Meanwhile, based on literature studies, the 
software industry means  an industrial activity 
related to the development of information 
technology including computer services, data  
processing, database development, software 
development, system integration, system design 
and analysis, software architectural design, and 
infrastructure design , software and hardware, and 
portal design including maintenance . 
 
ICT Sector Industri es 
The de velopment of standards is an 
important element of the mandate of the Working 
Party on Indicators for the Information Society 
(WPIIS). The first paragraph of the terms of 
reference reads: Industry will ensure continuous 
improvement in terms of data collecti on 
methodologies at the international level for 
measuring supply and demand, information and 
communication technology (ICT). This will 
include developing and maintaining standards for 
measuring the ICT sector, ICT goods and services, 
e-business including e -commerce, IT security, digital content and ICT diffusion for organizations 
and individuals.  
The first achievement of WPIIS in that 
role came in 1998 when delegates agreed on the 
definition of an ICT -based industrial sector. The 
combined sector of manufact uring and industrial 
services which covers the production, delivery , or 
display of data and information electronically. In 
order to promote international comparability of 
statistics and accelerate compilation of relevant 
data, the definition is based on cu rrent industry 
standards, namely the International Standard 
Industrial Classification, Revision 3.1 (ISIC Rev. 
3.1) on all economic activities . 
In 1998, it was recognized that an activity -
based definition should be complemented by a 
classification of ICT p roducts. Mapping products 
for activities will enable more precise 
quantification of production related to ICTs and 
value added and employment, both in the core ICT 
sector and in other sectors of the economy.  
The sector definition is complemented by 
the def inition of ICT goods in 2003 and the 
definition of ICT services in 2006.The first is 
based on the 2002 version of the harmonized 
system used for trade statistics and the latter on the 
latest version of the Product Classification Center - 
UN or United Natio n Central Product 
Classification (UN CPC). Furthermore and related 
to this, the Organization for Economic Co -
operation and Development (OECD) has provided 
a framework for the ICT sector and to support 
basic economic analysis. For example, some of the 
key i ndicators published in the OECD's 
Information Technology Outlook; Science, 
Technology and Industry Scoreboard; The 
measurement of the ICT sector industry and the A Study On The Potential Of The Development Of Software Applications And Digital Content … (Ahmad Budi S etiawan ) 
  
 149 
 impact of ICTs on the economy is based on this 
definition. Such definitions have also been use d for 
national data releases and analytical studies of 
interest to policy analysts.  
The main objective of the ICT sector 
review is to maintain the classification standards in 
a contemporary (current) manner and seek to 
preserve them. This is a special chal lenge, where 
goods and services related to the latest/modern ICT 
will quickly emerge and develop. In more detail, 
the OECD proposes an ICT sector based on the 
general characteristics of industries that have ICT 
products. The following figure illustrates th is 
proposal . 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . ICT Sector Industries  
One important feature of the definition of 
the ICT sector proposed by the OECD is that it 
violates the traditional ISIC dichotomy between 
manufacturing and service activities. The activities 
of produ cing or distributing ICT products can be 
found in various aspects of the economy/industry. 
In addition, by identifying the key sectors whose 
main activity is the production or distribution of 
ICT products, this definition represents the first 
approach sequ ence of the ICT production sector.  With regards to digital content, the OECD 
defines that the sector is a group of economic 
activities/industry whose activities are mainly 
engaged in publishing and/or electronic 
distribution of content products. The value of these  
products to consumers does not lie in the 
quality/tangible form, but lies in the values of 
information, education, culture or entertainment 
content. A content product is published through 
mass communication media in accordance with the 
message p resented  for the community/consumers. 
The chart in the following figure explains the 
relationship between digital content and the ICT 
sector in the information economy . 
 
Figure 3 . Industrial Activities in the Information 
Economy  
 
Referring to  the 2009 Indo nesian Standard 
Industrial  Classification (KBLI) issued by 
Statistics Indonesia (BPS),  based on the Regulation 
of Head of the Statistics Indonesia  No. 57 of 2009, 
the Software Industry and Digital Content Industry 
are included in the Informat ion and 
Commun ication Group , where the Software and 
Digital Content industry is included in the 
classification of Programming, Computer 
Consulting, Information Technology and Other Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
150  Computer Services as well as the Production of 
Motion Picture, Video and Te levision Progr am 
Sub-categories.  
Programming, Computer Consulting, 
Information Technology , and Other Computer 
Services Sub -Activities include writing, 
modification, testing , and supporting software 
activities to meet the needs of certain clients. 
Activitie s that are als o included in this sub -
category include; planning, designing, supplying 
and installing; computer system management and 
support services that integrate hardware, software 
and computer communication technology. 
Meanwhile, Moving Image, Video an d Television 
Program Production Sub -category includes the 
production of moving images or animation 
including digital game s, films, videos, television 
programs or television mobile advertisements.  
 
METHODOLOGY  
The stages of this research include 
research backgro und, problem formulation, 
research objectives and problems. In this stage, 
literature studies are carried out to study various 
theories that are relevant  with the framework of 
research methodology in solving the problems. The 
literature study  used is relat ed to case studies of 
information technology infrastructure planning in 
the research object environment, the software 
industry and digital content. Information 
technology infrastructure planning theories are 
taken from library materials, lect ure materials,  the 
internet, scientific journals and regulations, 
procedures, and documents/references related to 
the industry . 
 
 Collection of Data and Information  
The collection of data needed is carried out 
in several methods , namely : 
• Interview method co nducted to sev eral 
parties related to the research . interviews 
were conducted with five informants ; 
• Focus Group Discussion (FGD) involving 
experts in the software application 
industry, digital content industry , and 
representatives from the Directorate of 
Informatics Ind ustry Empowerment as 
well as from the Ministry of Industry and 
the Ministry of Trade . A total of four FDG 
series were conducted to support this 
research . 
 
Data collection through in -depth interviews and in 
several series of focus group discus sions were the n 
carried out by expert judgments. Furthermore, the 
collected data were further analyzed by the 
research team .  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The development of communication and 
information technology in the last two decades has 
been very rapid, t his is support ed by the increasing 
spread and quality of telecommunications services, 
especially the Internet. The same thing also 
happens in Indonesia where telecommunication 
access has become a primary need that cannot be 
separated from  everyday life . 
Another challeng e for a large country like 
Indonesia is the provision of infrastructure to 
support economic activit ies. The infrastructure 
itself has a very broad spectrum. One thing that 
must get the main attention is infrastructure that 
encourages connecti vity between r egions so that it A Study On The Potential Of The Development Of Software Applications And Digital Content … (Ahmad Budi S etiawan ) 
  
 151 
 can accelerate and expand Indonesia's economic 
development. Deployment  of infrastructure that 
encourages connectivity will reduce transportation 
and logistics costs so as to increase product 
competitiveness and accelerate ec onomic 
movemen t. Included in this connectivity 
infrastructure is the development of transportation 
routes and information and communication 
technology (ICT), as well as all regulations and 
rules related to these matters . 
The quality of human resources rema ins a 
challeng e for Indonesia. Currently, about 50 
percent of the workforce in Indonesia still has 
primary school education and only about 8 percent 
has a diploma/bachelor's degree. The quality of 
human resources is closely related to the quality of 
educat ion, health fa cilities and access to basic 
infrastructure. In terms of Human Resources (HR), 
Indonesia is a country with the 4th largest 
population in the world. A large population with increasing purchasing power is a potential market, 
meanwhile, a large population wit h continuously 
improving quality of Human Resources (HR) is a 
potential for extraordinary competitiveness.  
Indonesia is in a transition period in the 
structure of the productive age population. In the 
period 2020 -2030, the decline in Indonesi a's 
dependency  index (which has been going on since 
1970) will reach its lowest figure. An important 
implication of this condition is the increasing 
importance of providing employment so that the 
economy can make maximum use of the large 
portion of the pop ulation of pro ductive age. More 
importantly, if the level of education in general is 
assumed to continue to improve, the productivity 
of the country's economy is actually in a premium 
condition, which will be very beneficial for the 
purposes of acceleratin g and expandin g economic 
development . 
 
Figure  4. Age Demographics of the Indonesian Population  
 
Indonesia is facing rapid urbanization. If in 2010 , 
as much as 53 percent of Indonesia's population 
lived in urban areas, BPS predicts that by 2025  the 
populatio n in urban areas will reach 65 percent. 
The direct implication that must be anticipated due 
to urbanization is an increase in movement patterns, changes in consumption patterns and 
production structures that have an impact on the 
labor struct ure, increased  land use conflicts, and an 
increase in the need for reliable infrastructure 
support to support the distribution of goods and 
services. With all the potentials and challenges Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
152  outlined above, Indonesia needs an acceleration of 
economic transfo rmation so tha t the welfare of the 
entire community can be realized early . 
 
Indonesia’s ICT Industry Mapping  
The development of communication and 
information technology in the last two decades has 
been very rapid, this is supported by the increasing sprea d and quality of telecommunications services, 
especially the Internet. The same thing also 
happens in Indonesia where telecommunication 
access has become a primary need that cannot be 
separated in everyday life. Broadband penetration 
as a major ICT technol ogy currently has a strong 
correlation with the Global Competitiveness Index. 
This relationship can be seen in Figure 5  below  
 
Figure  5. Broadband Penetration vs Global Competitiveness Index  
(Source : World Economic Forum, 2010; ITU, 2010; Booz & Company  analysis)  
 
Its contribution to the country's economy 
also grew very significantly, in 2013 when our 
GDP only grew 5.78%, the telematics sector 
together with transportation could grow 10.19% 
and became the only sector that grew in double 
digits. 
The level of telematics adoption in 
Indonesian society has also increased significantly. 
This is indicated by the number of cellphone users 
until October 2014 , reaching more than 300 
million numbers or penetration of 120% and 
exceeding the world averag e. The number of 
Indonesian internet users has reached 100 million people and is ranked 8th in the world with an 
average growth of 58% in the last 5 years. 
Indonesians are also very active in using internet -
based applications, with the  country's social med ia 
ranked 4th in the world for Facebook users and 5th 
for Twitter.  
The concept of competitiveness also 
relates to static and dynamic components. As 
previously stated, productivity also plays a central 
role in determining the rate of return on 
investment, w hich is actual ly a key factor in 
explaining a country's economic growth potential 
(Schwab, 2012) . A Study On The Potential Of The Development Of Software Applications And Digital Content … (Ahmad Budi S etiawan ) 
  
 153 
 
 
Figure 6. Global connection based on connection technology generation . 
(Source : Wireless Intelligence, 2013)  
 
The Global Competitiveness Index i s a 
comprehensive  tool for measuring the 
microeconomic and macroeconomic foundations 
of a country. The World Economic Forum defines 
competitiveness as a set of institutions, policies, 
and factors that determine the level of productivity 
of a country. The l evel of productiv ity itself 
determines the rate of return on investment which 
is currently seen as the main driver of the growth 
rate. In other words, the more competitive a 
country's economy is, the greater the country's 
ability to support the sustainabil ity of its econom ic 
growth.  
Given the close relationship between 
broadband penetration and competitiveness, the 
topic of broadband is very strategic in national 
development. As is well known, one of the pillars 
of the Master Plan for the Acceleration of 
Indonesian Economic  Development (MP3EI) is 
connectivity, one of which is ICT. In each and 
between MP3EI economic corridors, good ICT 
connectivity in the form of broadband networks 
must be built. Within this framework, replacement 
of copper cables with fiber -optic cables has been 
programmed .  
Potential of Software Application and Digital 
Content Industry in Indonesia  
From the available data sample, there are 
33 companies or 31% of the total software industry 
companies located in West Java, followed by DKI 
Jakarta 26% (27 compa nies), and 12% in the 
Special Region of Yogyakarta (13 companies). 
Java Island still dominates the development of 
software companies, especially in DKI Jakarta. 
The existing software companies are located in 
capitals/big cities, where the economy is growin g. 
Meanwhile, there are 22 content industry 
companies, of which 42% of the total sample of 
companies are spread across DKI Jakarta, followed 
by West Java with 30% (15 companies) and 12% 
in East Java. A small number of others are in 
Yogyaka rta, Central Java , and Banten. Uniquely, 
from the sample data obtained, almost all of them 
are in Java Island. Java Island still dominates the 
development of digital content companies, 
especially in DKI Jakarta. The existing digital 
content companies are l ocated in capital s/big cities, 
where the economy is growing. When viewed from 
the content category, there are 29 companies Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
154  (58%) are games companies and 219 other 
companies (42%) are animation companies.  
If classified according to the number of 
employees i n the company, th ere are 89 software 
companies (35% of the total companies) which are 
classified as small companies with 0 -20 
employees, 10 companies are classified as 
medium -sized companies with 21 -50 employees, 
and 4 -6 companies. (4%) including large -scale 
companies. Mea nwhile, the ratio of the number of 
IT employees to the total number of existing 
employees is around 32%.  
Furthermore, software companies are 
noted to market their products the most 
domestically, namely 17% of the total sample of 
companies marketing their p roducts at home and 
abroad. Only 2 companies that market overseas 
and the rest are not yet marketed (are startup 
companies). Some of these companies do business 
only through online  media . The listed companies' 
marketing target countries ar e Singapore, Taiw an, 
China , and the Netherlands.  
Meanwhile, from the data collected, 36% 
of the companies are classified as household or 
small companies with a total of 1 -20 employees . 
Twenty percent of them are medium -scale 
companies with employees of 21 -100 people, 
while  the other 6% are large -scale companies with 
more than 100 employees. Nineteen other digital 
content companies did not respond because the 
existing contact number could no longer be 
contacted or the contact person did not have any 
contacts  of the companies ’ employees .  
Mapping of Software Application and Digital 
Content Industry in Indonesia  
The rapid development of information 
technology in Indonesia has been evident in the last two decades. This can be seen from the many 
uses of IT produ cts for both pers onal and 
corporate/business use. Some of the related IT 
products are gadgets, software s/applications, 
games, animation, and others. In fact, now IT has 
entered into the lifestyle of the majority of the 
capital's residents where people cann ot be 
separated f rom IT -related matters in their daily 
lives. This has resulted in the emergence of a 
market that is wide open for the IT industry in 
Indonesia.  
There have been many startups /start-ups in 
the information technology industry in recent 
years,  particularly in the fields of software, games 
and digital content. According to the DKI Digital 
Creative Industry Map documentation, there are 
more than 150 companies in Jakarta, consisting of 
120 software companies, 20 game companies and 
28 animation com panies. Of course , there are more 
IT companies in Indonesia. With the increasing 
number of startups/new companies, the 
government needs to control the development of 
the IT industry in order to maximize the existing 
potentials to improve the quality of the  Indonesian 
econo my. 
 Software industry companies 
develop/produce superior products for their users. 
The manufactur ing process  of these products is 
divided into two  methods , namely production  on 
request and production from original  ideas. The 
products prod uced by these com panies can be 
grouped by type s of industry. The following are 
categories that define the types of industrial 
products a listed company produces : 
1. Banking  
2. Manufacturing  
3. Distribution /Retail  
4. Insurance  A Study On The Potential Of The Development Of Software Applications And Digital Content … (Ahmad Budi S etiawan ) 
  
 155 
 5. Education  
6. Mining  
7. Plantation  
8. Cross Industry  
9. Travel  
10. Governmen t/Public Sector  
11. Health  
12. Entertainment  
13. Outsourcing  
14. Exercise  
15. Aviation  
16. Capital Intensive Industries  
17. Investment Management  
18. Creative Industries  
19. Property Industries  
20. Startup Industries  
21. Trading  
 
Each company can have one or more 
industry categories  according to eac h product. 
However, companies in the digital content industry 
are generally engaged in the Entertainment/Media 
industry. Each company can have one or more 
industry categories according to their respective 
software products. From the sample  of company 
data,  it is obtained that software s most developed 
by these companies are used for education (20%), 
entertainment (18%) and government (10%)  
sectors . 
From the data sample collected, as many 
as 90% or 45 of the 50 companies are included in 
the E ntertainment/Medi a industry category. The 
rest are only 1 -3 companies engaged in other fields 
such as Education, Hospitaly, Retail, Engineering, 
and Manufacturing. Thus, based on existing data, 
29 companies (58%) are games companies and 21 
other companies (42%) are animati on companies.  
Data on marketing scope for 13 out of the 
50 sample companies  are unavailable due to 
unresponsive contacts and no other sources of 
information were available . Data is successfully 
collected from  37 companies. The number of companies that mark et their products both 
domestically and abroad has almost the same ratio. 
There are 18 companies whose marketing scope is 
domestic and foreign, as well as 16 companies 
with domestic marketing scope . 
 
CONCLUSION  
The digital content  industry and soft ware 
applications are a never -ending business because 
their main capital is creativity. Especially in 
today's era of mobile devices, more and more users 
are gaining  the most out of their smart phones or 
tablets. Currently, telecommunicati ons is only a 
basic business for the use of technology. The 
sector s that can be developed are software 
applications and digital content. The development 
of the digital content industry and software 
applications can also be a way out to determine the 
direct ion of the Indones ian technology industry . 
 
 Recommendation  
Based on the discussion that has been 
carried out in this study, suggestions that can be 
given from the results of this study  include ;  
1. Increasing human resources’ capacity  by 
providing  easy acces s to knowledge suc h 
as books, training, tutors, and others.  
2. The government's support for digital 
content industry products and local local 
software applications is very important to 
be able to absorb the local content 
creators’ products  to trigger the high  
growth of content  products  
3. Providing guidelines in the distribution of 
content products, supporting  the marketing Jurnal Penelitian Pos dan Informatika, Vol. 10 No 02 December 2020 : page  145- 156 
156  of Indonesian content  products , and 
providing marketing distribution channels.  
4. Providing education and facilitating the 
management of copyrig ht and intellectua l 
property rights, in order to protect the 
original works  of local content creators . 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The author would like to thank the APTIKA 
and IKP  Research and Development Center for 
funding this research.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
Government of the Republic of Indonesia. Act 
Number 19 Year 2016 on Amandment of 
EIT Law (2016). Indonesia.  
Government of the Republic of I ndonesia. Act 
Numbe r 19 Year 2016 on Amandment of 
EIT Law (2016). Indonesia.  
Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs . 
(2011 ). Dokumen  Masterplan  Percepatan  
dan  Perluasan  Pembangunan  Ekonomi 
Indonesia 2011 -2025. Jakarta:  
Ministry of Industry of In donesia , (2017 ), 
“Investasi Industri Telematika Ditargetkan 
US$ 60 Juta ” 
https://kemenperin.go.id/artikel/17281/I
nvestasi -Industri -Telematika -Ditarge tkan -
US&hx0024%3B&hx2212%3B60 -Juta  
Directorate General of Industrial Regional 
Development . (2013). “Percepatan  
Pembangunan  Kawasan  Industri  di  Luar  
Pulau  Jawa  Melalui Pembangunan  
Infrastruktur  Pendukung  dalam  
Kerangka  MP3E I”. Ministry of Ind ustry 
of Indonesia.    
MIKTI. (2013). Peta Industri Kreatif Digital DKI 
Jakarta dan Rekomendasi, MIKTI, 2013  
KP3EI Connectivity Work Group . (2013). 
“Indonesia  Broadband  Plan ”. ICT Sub 
Team , Coordinating Ministry for 
Economic Affairs . Eddy Satriya . (2013).  Accelerating  Indonesia’s  
Economic  Transformation  Through  
MP3EI,  , KP3EI, Seminar on November 
2013.  
Sturgeon and Kawakami . (2010). Global  Value 
chains  in the Electronics Industry, , the 
World Bank.  
Dedrick  et.  Al . (2010 ). The  Distribution  of  
Value  in  the  Mobile  Phone  Supply  
chain,  Telecommunications Policy 
35(6):505 -521. DOI: 
10.1016/j.telpol.2011.04.006  
Klaus  Schwab . (2012). The  Global  
Competitiveness  Report  2012 -2013,  ,  
World Economic Forum  
 Pusat Mikroelektro nika Institut Tekno logi 
Bandung . (2013). “Strategi Pengembangan 
Industri Telematika di Indonesia”, 
Dokumen Kajian  PAUME ITB.  
 Timothy  J.  Sturgeon,  Momoko Kawakami . 
(2010). “Global  Value chains  in the 
Electronics Industry, Was the Crisis a 
Window of Op portunity  for  Dev eloping  
Countries?" . The World Bank.  
Irman  Idris  et. al. (2009).  "Kajian  Membangun  
Kemitraan  Bisnis  Manufaktur  Berbasis  
SMK", Studi Kasus  Manufaktur  
Elektronika,  ,  PUSAT 
MIKROELEKTRONIKA ITB.  
Dr. Martyn F. Roetter . (2013).  “The Broadband -
driven  Transformation of Consumer 
Markets” . Source:   
http://www.intercomms.net/AUG03/conte
nt/adl.php, access on  28 Desember 201 9. 
Simchi -Levi,  D.,  Kaminsky,  P.,  &  Simchi -
Levi,  E.  (2008).  Designing  and 
Managing the Supply chain. New Yo rk: 
McGraw -Hill. 
Scanion, Robert, Aligning Product and  Supply 
chain  Strategies in the Mobile Phone 
Industry, MIT, 2009.
 