 
  
The K4D helpdesk service provides brief summaries of current research, evidence, and lessons 
learned. Helpdesk reports are not rigorous or systematic reviews; they are intended to provide an 
introduction to the most important evidence related to a research  question. They draw on a rapid desk -
based review of published literature and consultation with subject specialists.  
Helpdesk reports are commissioned by the UK Department for International Development and other 
Government departments, but the views and o pinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of 
DFID, the UK Government, K4D or any other contributing organisation. For further information, please 
contact helpdesk@k4d.info.  
Helpdesk Report   
Barriers to Digital Services 
Adoption in Bangladesh  
 
Kevin Hernandez  
Institute of Development Studies  
01 August  2019  
Question s 
 What are the barriers/ constraints for the poor and vulnerable in accessing technology -
based services, particularly financial, education, and health services in Bangladesh?  
 How can these barriers be removed / access enhanced?  
Contents  
1. Summary  
2. Introduction  
3. Connectivity  
4. Financial Services  
5. e-Health  
6. Online Education  
7. Recommendations  
8. References  
 
  2 1. Summary  
This report uncovered many barriers t o digital services in Bangladesh with a particular focus  on 
access to digital connectivity, dig ital financial services, e-health, and online education. The 5 As 
of technology access were used as a framework to uncover barriers across these areas as well 
as connectivity. The report found significant barriers to the use of digital services regarding 
availability, affordability, awareness, ability, and agency across connectivity and t he three digital 
service areas . The findings of the 5 As analysis are summarised below.  
Availability : 97% of Bangladesh is covered b y a mobile signal. However , not everyon e has 
continuous access or access to the same speed (e.g. 2g, 3g, 4g). 17% of non-mobile phone 
users in Bangladesh cite a lack of  network coverage as a barrier (After Access 2018a) . Mobile 
networks and other infrastructure necessary for digital services (e.g. mobile money agents) tend 
to roll  out in places with relatively high levels of buying -power  where people are likely to have 
disposable income first which threatens to leave the most marginalised and poorest behind. 
Moreover, Intermittent access can also interrupt  and adds friction to user experiences in digital 
services . Energy infrastructure is also important. About 24% of people in Bangladesh lack access 
to electricity.1 A lack of electricity can hinder mobile phone usage and adoption of online 
education initiatives  and m -health (e.g. by making it  difficult for to run ICT equipment in 
classrooms ).  
The type of device people have access to matters . Basic ph ones have less functionalities than 
smartphones. Although 74% of people ages 15 to 65 in Bangladesh own mobile phones, only 
18% own smartphone s (LIRNEasia 2018) . Some digital services are only available via the 
Internet  and some require smartphone apps. When dig ital services are designed to only be 
accessed by more powerful devices,  the poor and marginalis ed are left out . For example, b asic 
phones are not sufficient to engage with Massive Online Open Courses which require video 
streaming capabilities and stable I nternet connections or with humanitarian chatbots that rely on 
instant messaging apps.  
A lack of content in Bengali is a lso a  barrier. One study found that rural m -Health users in 
Bangladesh could not engage with an m -health initiative  because the message s were in English  
(Khatun et al.  2016). Similarly, most O pen Education Resources are only available in English. 
Efforts to translate online education materials to Bengali have been slow and incomplete .  
Affordability :  Mobile phone ownership and connectivity eat up a greate r share of income for the  
poor. Although bKash, Bangladesh’s leading mobile money providers is inexpensive when 
compared to mobile money providers in other countries and does not burden the poor with 
regressive pricing strategies, people living below the poverty line  are still less lik ely to use it. 40% 
of non -mobile money users say they do not have enough money to transact to begin with 
(Financial Inclusion Insights 2018b) . 
Unless they are zero -rated or accessed through free public WFI, data intensive digital services  
(e.g. streaming online education al videos) require users to purchase  data which remain too  
costly for the poor. Moreover, making use of digital services  can require  additional costs offline . 
                                                   
1 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?end=2016&locations=BD&start=2011  3 For example, mNutrition services  may ask users to make dietary changes that is out of their 
reach  financially .  
Awareness : 67% of people in Bangladesh do not have Internet awareness (LIRNEasia 2018) . 
Awareness is also low for digital services. 41% of people in Bangladesh do not know what mobile 
money is or what it can be used for (Financi al Inclusion Insights 2018a) . Effective implementation 
of pro-poor digital services will require awareness campaigns  that target the poor . The poor are 
very unlikely to be aware of the potential benefits of m -health . Meanwhile, more educated and  
better off people are significantly more likely make use of m -health  services  (Bloom et al.  2017) . 
Although Bangladesh Open University (BOU) has made significant efforts to make its resources 
available online in multiple formats to increase uptake, awareness remains low amongst students 
and tutors.  
Ability : Not knowing how to use the Internet is the main barrier they face d by 67% of offline 
Bangladeshis. 27% of people in Bangladesh do not know how  to use a basic mobile phone  
(LIRNEasia 2018) . The ability barrier is even mor e pronounced for advanced mobile phone 
activities. 70% of Bangladeshis have full ability to make phone calls but only 9% can fully perform 
mobile financial transactions (Financial Inclusion Insights 2018a) .  Only 49% of people in 
Bang ladesh have some  ability to send and receive text messages  which is essential for m -health 
services which are largely SMS based  (Financial Inclusion Insights 2018b) . A lack of offline skills 
and knowledge can also limit uptake of digital services . Only 29% of people in Bangladesh are 
consi dered to be financially literate (Financial Inclusion Insights 2018b) . A study in rural 
Bangladesh showed that users largely ignored their text messages due to an inability  to read 
them (Khatun et al.  2016) . 
Online learning could provide an unfair advantage to tech savvy users . Less tech savvy learners 
may find it difficult to keep pace with peers because they need to learn the course materia l while 
learning how to use digital technology . Moreover, online learning requires an extra set of Do It 
Yourself (DIY) skills that is not common  the traditional classroom (Burns 2019) . MOOCs can  also 
place unrealistic expectations on learners with no or little  formal education since many MOOCs 
are delivered at a university level . This may create a vicious cycle where only better off students 
already able to perform at top  levels complete MOOCs .  
Some users that  may otherwise have the ability to set up a service  may not have the ability to set 
it up.  For example, the act of registering for m -Health requires users to deploy a significant 
degree of digital and language literacy, unless someone registers them on their behalf (GSMA and 
Frog 2017) .  
Agency and Gender : Women are less likely to be mobile phone owners and Internet users than 
men globally  (ITU, 2017) . This trend is especially pronounced in Bangladesh  where 58% of 
women vs. 87% of men own mobile phones (a 34% gap) and 7% of women vs. 18% of men use 
the Internet (a 62% gap) (After Access 2018b) . Women and girls are less likely to use digital 
technologies across all  activities including mobile money, social media, surfing the Internet, 
accessing entertainment, playing games, instant messaging, banking, email, and for studying  
(After Access 2018b; Girl Effect 2018) .  
Although some argue that  mobile  money adoption empowers women (GSMA 2013) , data suggests 
that mobile money adoption alone does not balance  gender equality . Mobile money empowers 4 both men and women. Although women advanced users have more financial autonomy over 
household decisions than women non-users or  basic users, men advanced mobile money users 
still have significa ntly more financial autonomy than women advanced users (Financial Inclusion 
Insights 2018b) . Moreover, women who do use mobile money are less likely to use it for 
advanced activities like borrowing, saving, and receiving wages (Financial Inclusion Insights 
2018a) . 
Bangladesh is a male -domi nated society. This impacts whether wome n access  digital technology 
and what they can do with it . Women are more likely to only access mobile phones through 
borrowing which is  associated  with lower levels of usage across digital activities  including  text 
and instant messaging, social media,  digital services  and even using the mobile phone’s 
calculator (Croxson and Rowntree 2017; Girl Effect 20 18). Women face gendered barriers to  digital 
services  beyond their household . Women in Bangladesh report being harassed or turned away 
by mobile money agents (Financial Inclusion Insights 2018b) . Social norms also lead to negative 
images of female  mobile phone users  with the result that  male family members l imit thei r access 
to protect family  reputation (Croxson and Rowntree 2017; Gir l Effect 2018) . It is unfair to expect to 
women and girls to instantly adopt digital technologies without facilitating cultural and value 
shifts. Girls going against the grain  currently encounter  serious threats including  being beaten, 
grounded, married  off, or being taken out of school (Girl Effect 2018) .  
 
2. Introduction  
According to some estimates, the number of Internet users around the world quadrupled in just 
12 years from 1 billion in 2005 to  4 billion in 2017 ; usage  now encompasses 57% of the global 
population.2 The spread of mobile phone use has been even more pronounced. Over two thirds  
of the global population are mobile phone subscribers .3 Although these numbers suggest that 
mobile phones  and the Internet are being used by more people across the world at much faster 
rates than any previous technologies, over 2 billion people are still not Internet users , and a third  
of the global population still do not own a mobile phone.  
Due to their ra pid proliferation, digital technologies provide development actors with the 
opportunity to reach more people, faster , and at less cos t (DFID , 2018). Actors across sectors , 
including government, the private sector, civil society and donors , are increasingly embracing 
digital technologies as a channel to deliver development -related services and information 
(Hernandez and Roberts , 2018) . The potential for information and communications technologies 
(ICTs ) to improve development outcomes is reflected in the Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG ) calling for the universal spread of the Internet (SDG target 9c). Beyond target 9c, 
increased use of digital technologies across all sectors in the economy and society mean s that 
the impact of ICTs and ICT -based applications are likely to be felt across all 17 SDGs (ITU, 
2017; Unwin , 2017 ). However, whether the spread of ICTs will have a net positive or net negative 
impact on achieving the  SDGs is unclear. There are several trade -offs between the spread of 
ICTs and several SDG goals (Hernandez , 2019; Unwin , 2017 ). One of these trade -offs is that of 
                                                   
2 https://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm  
3 https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/  5 the potential for ICTs to increase income inequality and development outcome inequality 
between those that have access to ICTs and tho se that do not as well as increasing inequality 
between those that are only minimally able to leverage ICTs to improve their well -being and 
those that are able to do so significantly (Unwin , 2017 ). The poorest and most marginalised have 
the least access to digital technology and are the least able to leverage ICTs to improve their 
well-being (Hernandez and Roberts , 2018; I nternational Telecommunications Union, 2017; 
UNDP , 2016; World Bank , 2016 ). Thus, an uneven spread of ICTs threatens to limit our ability to 
achieve the overarching ‘Leave No One Behind’ S DG goal.  
Although the stat istics in the introductory paragraph paint a glossy picture about Internet and 
mobile phone usage, they use very broad definitions for what constitutes an Internet user or a 
mobile phone subscriber ,4 and mask significant discrepancies between people in different 
countries and within countries. Four out of five people in developed countries were Internet users 
in 2018 (International Telecommunications Union, 2018) . On the other hand, usage of digital 
technology beyond making phone calls is especially rare in many lower middle -income countries 
like Bangladesh. 74% of the people aged 15 to 65 in Bangladesh own ed mobile phones as of 
late 2017, but just 13% had ever used the Internet and social media  (LIRNEasia, 2018 ). Out of 
18 developing countries studied by ‘After Access’, Bangladesh score d 3rd lowest in terms of 
internet awareness and usage rates (LIRNEasia , 2018 ). Withi n countries there are also 
disparities in connectivity between people living in different areas within countries. These 
disparities are especially pronounced between people from different socio -economic 
backgrounds, and between marginali sed and non -margina lised groups (After Access , 2018b; 
World Bank , 2016) . 
The figures in the introductory paragraph divide populations and groups in half: users and non -
users. All internet users and mobile phone subscribers are treated as equal users. However, 
access to digital technology is not binary. There are also discrepanc ies in mobile and Internet 
usage between those counted as ‘users’. Rather than a neat digital divide between people 
continuously connected to the Internet via smartphones and laptops , and people without any 
access to phones or the Internet at all, there ar e many levels in between . For example,  some 
people may only experienc e limited or intermittent/spotty network coverage from devices with 
only limited functionality like basic phones (Roberts and Hernandez , 2019) . Even when someone 
uses a mobil e phone or the Internet, they may face subsequent barriers after access that affect 
their ability to make greater use of these technologies , or to use them to improve their well -being 
(e.g. to access digital finance, e -health, and online education services ). (Financial Inclusion 
Insights , 2018b).  
There is a danger that an over -emphasis on providing services digitally may leave the poorest 
and most marginali sed further behind. Tackling this danger requires development professionals 
to think past binary statistics of mobile phone users vs. p hone users and online vs. offline. This 
report aims to help development professionals understand the multiple barriers that affect access 
to digital technologies and their subsequent usage to extract development gains. It does so using 
                                                   
4 Live Internet Stats counts anyone with ‘available access’ to an Internet connection point and basic web 
technology knowled ge as an Internet user. Meanwhile GSMA counts unique mobile subscribers as the number of 
people who are subscribed to a mobile tariff or service (eg. SIM card rather than mobile phone owners).  6 Roberts and Hernandez's  (2019)  5As of technology access framework .5 The framework highlights 
five different types of barriers (Availability, Affordability, Ability, Awareness, and Agency) that 
affect technology access. Access to mobile phones an d the Internet can be hindered or mediated 
by these barriers. Furthermore, Access to mobile phones or the Internet does not assure their 
use for specific activities (e.g. text -messaging or social media). Thus, the 5As could be applied to 
specific digital a pplications or activities to get a better understanding of why they are not used or 
used more. This report uses the 5As to analyse barriers to adoption to both digital technologies 
in general (Internet and mobile phones) and for specific activities and app lications , namely digital 
finance, e -health, and online education. Understanding these barriers is the first step in 
increasing digital adoption and increasing the use of digital technologies to achieve development 
gains , as well as to safeguard those at risk of being left behind. Further work is needed on how to 
overcome these barriers.  
This report  is divided into six main sections. This introduction is followed by a section focusing on 
barriers to connectivity in regards to mobile phone ownership and Internet usage. The 
connectivity section sets the tone for the sections that follow by providing an overview of barriers 
to connectivity (a prerequisite to being able to use digital services) in Bangladesh. Sections, 
three, four and fiv e focus on barriers to digital financial services, e -health, and online education 
respectively and provide more in -depth evidence about barriers to each type of digital service in 
particular. The final section concludes the report and makes some recommenda tions based on 
its findings. This report was commissioned by DFID Bangladesh and thus tries to contextualise 
barriers in the Bengali context. However, many of the findings are likely to be relevant in other 
places. The barriers uncovered in this report are  meant to be illustrative but not exhaustive. This 
report was limited to 8 days of secondary research and thus may have missed some key 
barriers. Primary ethnographic research would improve the chances of uncovering barriers 
further.  
3. Connectivity  
Classes o f Digital Access  
Differences in access to digital technology are not binary. Evidence suggests that there are 
‘classes of digital access’ which tend to mirror socio -economic class and other forms of 
oppression (e.g. gender, caste, e ct.) (Roberts and Hernandez , 2019 ). The poorest and most 
marginali sed are most likely to be part of the ICT ‘working class’ and ‘under class’ (see Figure 1 
below). This leaves already marginali sed groups at a disadvantaged position and makes them 
less likely to gain from digital goods and services (e.g. digital finance, eHealth, and online 
education) compared to better groups due the multiple and often overlapping barriers they face in 
getting connected. As more public and private services, employment opportunities, a nd more 
aspects of life move online, those at the bottom of the ICT class pyramid (disproportionately the 
poorest and most marginali sed) risk being left behind in a digital world (Hernandez and Roberts , 
2018) .  
 
                                                   
5 Although Hernandez (the author of this report) was a co -author on this article, Roberts created the framework 
and deserves full credit for its development  7 See: Figure 1: Classes of technology access and connectivity ( Roberts and Hernandez, 2019 : 8), 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/isd2.12084  
 
There are signs of this playing out in Bangladesh. Although 74% of people between the ages of 
15 and 65 own a mobile phone in Bangladesh, only 45% of mobile phone owners own Internet 
friendly phones, and just 18% (24% of the 74% who are mobile phone owners) have 
smartphones which provide users with advanced functionality (LIRNEasia , 2018) . Moreover, only 
1% and 5% of basic and feature phone users in Bangladesh are internet users , whereas 64% of 
smartphone owners are (LIRNEasia , 2018 ). Only 2% of basic phone owners and 4% of feature 
phone  owners in Bangladesh are social media users whereas , 62% of smartphone users use 
social media. Furthermore, although mobile phone ownership is high in Bangladesh, only 4% of 
people own a desktop or laptop. This is an important distinction since although t he most 
advanced mobile phones offer increased functionality, their small screens and limited interfaces 
mean there are still many tasks and activities , like carrying out research or analysing data , that 
are more efficiently carried out on bigger more powe rful devices (LIRNEasia , 2018 ). 
Barriers of technology access or of access to a specific application of a technology (e.g. digital 
finance, eHealth, and online education) are more likely to be experienced by the poorest and 
most marginali sed, whom are disproport ionately represented in the ICT under and working 
classes. he rest of this section introduces each of the 5As in regards to access to mobile phones 
and the Internet more generally and includes examples of these barriers playing out in 
Bangladesh when possi ble. The 5As can be thought of as an illustrative but not exhaustive list of 
necessary but insufficient non -binary conditions for Access. Even when a ‘user’ is connected, 
any or multiple of the As may limit their ability to use digital technology more or f or more 
advanced activities.  
 
See: Figure 2: The 5As of Technology Access  (Roberts and Hernandez, 2019:  4), 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/isd2.12084  
 
Availability  
Availability refers to whether a given technology or technological solution (e.g. mobile money) is 
available in the market in a given geography or to a specific user. This refers to both the 
hardware (e.g. devices) and infrastructure (e.g. mobile network) needed to make use of a 
technology. Because mobile operators are mainly profit driven companies, they tend to build their 
telecommunications infrastructure in places with buying powe r first rather than in remote 
impoverished areas (World Bank , 2016) . Like access in general, network availability is not binary. 
As newe r generations of mobile connectivity emerge (e .g. 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G) providing faster and 
better connectivity, the newer infrastructure tends to be rolled out in wealthier areas first. In 2017, 
97.1% of Bangladesh was covered by a 2G signal and 92.5% was cove red by a 3G signal. 
However, only 10.8% of Bangladesh had 4G coverage.6   
                                                   
6 https://www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/#year=2017&zon eIsocode=BGD&analysisView=BGD  8 Although mobile network coverage of 97.1% may sound impressive. A lack of coverage 
disproportionately acts as a barrier to those who do not use mobile phones. In a recent survey, 
17% of people that do not own mobile phones in Bangladesh suggested that mobile coverage is 
not available in their area (After Access , 2018a ). Because infrastructure tends be built in wealthy 
areas first, urban areas tend to be better connected than rural a reas globally. The Urban -Rural 
mobile connectivity divide in Bangladesh stands at 7% , which is relatively low compared to other 
lower and middle income  countries. However, the urban rural gap is much higher for more 
advanced digital activities including In ternet and social media use at 38% and 40% , respectively  
(LIRNEasia , 2018 ).  
Along with the presence of a mobile network, frequent usage of mobile phones requires the 
availability of other technologies (e.g. electricity to charge a mobile phone) or for specific  users to 
make use of it (e.g. assistive technology for people with disabilities). According to World Bank 
data, approximately 76% of people in Bangladesh had access to electricity in 2016 .7 In a recent 
survey, 19% of people in Bangladesh that do own a mob ile phone mentioned not having 
electricity at home to charge their mobile phones as a barrier (After Access , 2018a ). Moreover, 
users with only one or two power outlets at home will have to compete with other family members 
using other appliances to charg e their phones (Evans  et al., 2018) .  
Along with infrastructure and devices , ICTs may not be useful unless there is availability of locally 
relevant content online in a language that one can understand and engage with (Roberts and 
Hernandez 2019) . At the time of writing, English constitutes for 54% of the language content on 
the internet and the top 12 languages (English, Russian, German, Spanish, French, Japanese, 
Portuguese, Italian, Persian, Polish, Chinese, and Turkish) make up over 90% of all content 
online. Meanwhile Bengali constituted for less than 0.1% of online content , and minority 
languages spoken in Bangladesh are likely to be even less represented online.8 A study of  
potential mobile inter net users  across Bangladesh and three other South Asian countries  - 
people that do not currently use mobile Internet , but are most likely to use it based on their 
backgrounds  - found that a ‘lack of need and relevance’ was their third biggest barrier (Croxson 
and Rowntree , 2017) . 
Affordability  
When a technology is available, Affordability  - and the other As  - may still hinder users from 
being as digitally connected as the ICT upper class. To make use of digital technology, users 
must be able to afford both the device and remaining connected. Affordability of handsets was 
cited as the biggest barrier for mobile Internet in a GSMA (Global S ystem for Mobile 
Communications Asso ciation ) study of potential adopters in Bangladesh  - users that are most 
likely to adapt the technology given their background (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) . 59% of 
non-users in Bangladesh cite not having enough money to buy a mobile phone as a main barrier 
to using one (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . Like access in general, affordability is also not 
binary. For example, some users may only be able to afford small amounts of pre -paid data that 
they mu st use frugally , while others can afford post -paid plans that allow them to remain 
                                                   
7 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?end=2016&locations=BD&start=2011  
8 https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/what -languages -are-spoken -in-bangladesh.html  9 connected continuously without interruption. Similarly, a poorer user may be able to afford a 
basic phone but a smartphone may remain out of their reach (Roberts a nd Hernandez , 2019) .  
Cost is a more restrictive barrier for the poor and marginalised since staying connected eats up a 
larger portion of their incomes. LIRNEasia (2018)  finds that 89% of people in Bangladesh with 
above average income own mobile phones , while 73% with below average incomes and only 
54% with no income do. Inequalities in usage between the poor and non -poor are even more 
pronounced for internet use. In Bang ladesh, 25% of people living above the USD  2.50 per day 
poverty line report having used the internet in the last 90 days, while only 12% of the poor 
(USD 1.25-250 per day ), and just 3% of the extreme poor (less than USD 1.25 per day) having 
used it (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) . 
Moreover, other costs beyond the cost of handsets and connectivity need to be taken into 
consideration. Faith (2018)  found that the costs of charging mobile phones, repairing them, and 
topping them up with credit create  structural barriers to digital access for poorer women.  
Awareness  
Awareness refers to knowing that a given technology exists as well as knowledge about what the 
technology allows the user to do and the value the user can extract from its usage. Awareness is 
also not binary. There are ‘levels of awareness about its functi ons and applications as well as 
critical awareness of the extent to which it is relevant to a person’s life priorities and concerns’ 
(Roberts and Hernandez , 2019: 4) . In a recent survey, 67% of people between the ages of 15 t o 
65 in Bangladesh did not have internet awareness  (LIRNEasia, 2018 ).  
Beyond simply knowing what mobile phones and the Internet are, users also need to be aware 
about how they could use them extract value. This includes awareness of applications and 
services that can be accessed once online (e.g. search engines, streaming we bsites, e -books, 
etc.) and via mobile phone (e.g. text messaging, mobile apps, etc.). Awareness differs between 
different digital technology uses. For example, less than 25% of people aged 15 to 65 in 
Bangladesh are aware of e -commerce platforms where good s and services can be bought and 
sold. 23% are aware that it can be used to book tickets or appointments; 19% are aware they 
can hire taxis or transport online; 13% are aware the Internet can be used to hire help  (e.g. 
platforms for hiring people to perfor m tasks like cleaning and fixing and installing things) ; 10% 
know they can use the Internet to book accommodation; and 16% are aware of microwork 
activities online (Galpaya and Amarasinghe , 2018) .  
It is important to note that like the other As, Awareness is necessary but insufficient for usage. 
Although a third  of people aged 15 to 65 in Bangladesh are aware of the Internet, only 13% use 
it, and despite almost a quarter  of people being aware of e -commerce platforms, the amount of 
Bangladeshis that use them are negligible (Galpaya and Amarasinghe 2018; LIRNEasia 2018) .  
Ability  
Ability refers to having the necessary skills to make use of digital technology. 27% of people in 
Bangladesh do not know how to use a basic mobile phone (LIRNEasia , 2018) . The ability barrier 
is even more pronounced for more advanced digital activities and applications. 67% of offline 
Bangladeshis say that not knowing how to use the Internet is the main barrier they face 
(LIRNEasia , 2018) . Much of the content on the Internet  - as well as the content neces sary to 
reach other content  - is mainly in written language or requires users to navigate content in written 10 language to reach it. A shortage of confidence in using digital technology and digital skills was 
the fourth most cited barrier for potential mobil e Internet adopters in Bangladesh  - people who 
are most likely to adopt mobile Internet based on their backgrounds (Croxson and Rowntree 
2017) . 
Like the other As covered i n this section, Ability is not binary. ‘Digital skills exist in a continuum, 
from basic functional skills to high -level specialized ones’ (UNESCO , 2018 b: 4).  While many 
users are increasingly becoming familiar with basic and smartphones, not all users have the 
ability to use all the functions, applications, and platforms that can be accessed on these 
devices. The ability to do one thing with digital technolo gy does not necessarily translate into 
ability to do all possible things with a mobile phone. 30% of the population in Bangladesh does 
not have complete ability to make and receive phone calls on a mobile phone. 37% do not have 
complete ability to navigate  a phone menu. 73% do not have complete ability to send or receive 
text messages. 84% do not have complete ability to use the Internet. 91% do not have complete 
ability to perform a digital financial transaction (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . 
Meanwhile, the ICT upper class manages to remain on the digital frontier and have abilities that 
allow them to leverage specialised software like big data analytics , and newer technologies like 
Blockchain , cryptocurrencies, the Internet of Things, and artificial intelligence to extract 
dispropo rtionate gains from digital technologies (McKi nsey Global Institute , 2015) . Although the 
Internet makes the same information available to all people in theory, differences in offline 
abilities [or capacity] are often amplified online. Digital technologies allow users to leverage their 
existing know ledge and skills in ways that disproportionately benefit the already better off and 
increase relatively inequalities (Toyama , 2015a) .  
The skills necessary to be an effective digital citizen in the digital era are a moving target. Along 
with traditional notions of digital literacy  - the ability to use computers and the Internet  to find, 
produce and share information  - being fully digitally literate at a given time includes the ability to 
adapt to emerging societal challenges arising from the use of digital technology , such as fake 
news and automation in the workplace (UNESCO , 2018b) . Digital literacy will continue to evolve 
as new technologies emerge and their usage lead to new opportunities and challenges. ‘A 
person possessing digital skills at a given time is likely to lose his or her mastery as a result of 
that evolution. This dimension must be taken into account in grasping the subject of digital skills: 
those skills must be not only acquired but constantly adapted and updated’ (UNESCO , 2018: 4 -
5). 
Agency  
An individual’s ‘agency’ refers to the degree to which he or she feels they can act in their 
environment and the world more broadly to bring about change (Chambers , 1983) . Sen (1999)  
illustrated how ‘ some people who experience persistent deprivation supress their aspirations and 
revise their expectation s downwards resulting in a lack of aspiration or appetite for change ’ 
(Roberts and Hernandez , 2019 : 5). Individuals marginalised by social norms like gender and 
ethnicity are often end up internalising a sense of powerlessnes s or lack of self -worth , which can 
then further negatively affect their sense of agency for change.  
Self internalisation  
Croxson and Rowntree (2017)  studied mobile phone owners in Bangladesh with high potential to 
adopt of mobile Internet based on their backgrounds : literat e young adults between 25 to 35 ; 11 living in places with at least 3G coverage ; who are aware of the Internet and do not reject it, and 
come from lower and middle class backgrounds. They found that although most potential 
adopters in Bangladesh were aware of benefits linked to using mobile Internet and ascribe 
mostly positive, aspirational attributes to internet  users, potential adopters tended not to relate to 
this image themselves and often said things like ‘the Internet is not for someone like me’ 
(Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) . Similarly, Girl Effect (2018: 8) found that ‘girls who experience a 
range of social restrictions appear more likely to internalise ideas that phones c an be unsafe and 
girls c annot be trusted with the phone. ’ 
Gatekeepers  
Social norms often dictate what is seen as acceptable behaviour by different groups in society 
(e.g. gender, caste, ethnicity, social class, etc.). These norms also affect which people h ave 
access to digital technology and how they are able to use them. Those made more powerful by 
social norms often use their power to restrict rather than incentivise digital technology use by the 
less powerful (APC , 2018) . 23% of people who do not own a mobile phone surveyed from 
Bangladesh said they are  not allowed to use one. Thus, they are automatically locked out of any 
further financial, health, and education benefits afforded by mobile phones (Financial Inclusion 
Insights , 2018b) . Amongst potential Internet adopters (both men and women), the need to ask 
permission from gatekeepers w as the fourth most cited barrier in Bangladesh  (Croxson and 
Rowntree , 2017) . However, this ranking was for both men and women. If the ranking was 
isolat ed for barriers to access for women, this barrier would score higher. This barrier is ‘ almost 
exclusively [experienced by] women, as men rarely have to ask for permission to  use the internet 
and did not feel they had to justify  their use of mobile internet  to others ’ (Croxson and Rowntree , 
2017 : 33). In Bangladesh, women and girls are seen as more susceptible to being ‘led astray’ or 
influenced by the nega tive side of the Internet , and thus more likely to cause their family 
reputational damage if they use the Internet. Social expectations often mean that men in 
Bangladesh are seen as the protectors of their family’s interest and reputation , and thus have an  
incentive to act as gatekeepers to digital technology rather than enablers of access (Croxson and 
Rowntree , 2017) .  
In a survey of thousands of adolescent girls from 25 c ountries including Bangladesh, Girl Effect 
(2018)  found that girls ‘ referred to a number of social barriers that they were aware of, or 
experienced themselves . These were primarily  related to parental safety concerns resulting in 
fathers and mothers not allowing ownership  …. In contrast a much lower proportion of boys 
identify social barriers to mobile access, suggesting that boys do not face the same social 
constraints as girls, or  do not see these social barriers influencing them as strongly as girls do ’ 
(Girl Effect , 2018 : 36). Going against these social barriers can be further disempowering for girls 
unless they are supported in going against the grain.  In ‘ Bangladesh girls can experience  strong 
negative social  judgement for being associated  with a phone, which often  appears to echo the 
limited  mobility that they experience  in their daily live s … girls al so report that the consequences 
of parents’ discovery of illicit access can be enormous. They include being judged by family and 
friends, beaten, and even married off ’ (Girl Effect , 2018: 56). Some girls also report being taken 
out of school for owning phones.  
Gender norms embedded in culture can act as indirect gatekeepers , even when a girl or 
woman’s immediate social circle is accepting of their use of digital technology. In male -
dominated societies mobile agents are often men and are unwelcoming of women buying data. 
The result is that women are disincentivised from visiti ng them , and that husbands or another 
male family member tends to buy top -up for their wives /female family members,  and they usually 12 end up buying credit for them in small amounts because they don’t trust them (Croxson and 
Rowntree , 2017)  
Fear of the Dark Side of the Web  
According to Roberts and Hernandez (2019) , Appetite  for being or using specific digital solutions  
falls under Agency but is sometimes referred to as another A. Croxson and Rowntree (2017)  
found that in South Asia, fear of being disadvantaged by digital technology’s dark side i s the 
most cited barrier for new and potential mobile Internet users. To new and potential users, the 
Internet can be a double -edged sword. Potential and new users see its value as a tool for 
communication, learning, and entertainment. However, they also f ear its potential negative side -
effects: ‘ potentially addictive, a waste of time and money, a risk to an individual’s safety because 
of scams, exposure to explicit content or cyber harassment, and potentially damaging to 
relationships. For Potential Adopte rs, the negative side of the web is often more front -of-mind 
than the positive ’ (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017 : 8). In Bangladesh, the dark side of the Internet 
was identified as a barrier that affected women more than men. These fears start from a young 
age. Girl Effect (2018)  found that g irls worry more than boys about the risks they may be 
exposed to if they go online , especially social media.  Globally, women are more likely to be 
harassed online than men (Fraser and Martineau -Searle , 2018) . 
Gender  cuts across all the other four As  
With a gender gap of 34% in mobile p hone ownership and a gender gap of 62% and 66% in 
Internet and social media usage respectively, gender remains a significant barrier to connectivity 
in Bangladesh. Women are disproportionately challenged across barriers in comparison to men , 
due to social norms and unequal opportunities (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) . They are more 
likely to be denied access by gatekeepers (usually male), they are often more vulnerable to bei ng 
negatively affected by the negative side of the Internet, they tend to have less purchasing power, 
they are often busier than men and have less free time than men to use technology or learn how 
to use it, have smaller social circles, and have been condi tioned to have less confidence to learn 
digital skills. The result is that women and girls require more support to adopt digital technologies 
than men (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) . Girls are more likely to access phones through 
borrowing, only be able to use them in secret, or to have no access to them at all. This ultimately 
means that they have less opportunities to learn how to use them or to ask for help in using them 
(Girl Effect , 2018) . Moreover, due to having greater agency in comparison to girls, boys are more 
likely to use their mobile phones for more diverse and sophisticated activities than girls , meaning 
girls are being left behind from digital gains (Girl Effect , 2018) . 
Girl Effect (2018)  finds that girls tend to have less a ccess to mobile phones in countries with 
higher gender inequality regardless if the country on a whole has high, medium, or low levels of 
mobile phone penetration. Moreover, a girl’s environment affects her access to phones and how 
she perceives access. Gi rls living in households and communities that provide them with more 
freedom tend to have higher levels of mobile phone access. On the other hand, girls living in 
environments with less agency often have less access, use mobile phones less frequently for 
shorter periods of time and for less activities. Moreover, girls with less agency often end up 
internalising ideas that they shouldn’t be using a mobile phone or certain applications (e.g. 
Facebook and Whatsapp ) because they are girls or that it would be their own responsibility to 
prove that they are worthy of using a phone (Girl Effect , 2018)  13 Adolescent boys are 1.5 times more likely to own a mobile pho ne and 1.8 times more likely to 
own a smartphone than adolescent girls (Girl Effect , 2018) . Moreover, because girls are more 
likely to access mobile phones by borrowing rather than owning, they are more likely to have 
their digital activities monitored and partially restricted than boys. 95% of girls surveyed in 
Bangladesh by Girl Effect (2018)  borrow phones with brothers (42 %) and fathers being the main 
sources of phones.9 The result is that girls in Bangladesh use mobile phones for less activities 
than boys including: making phone calls, sending text messages, playing games, entertainment, 
listening to radio, accessing the I nternet and Facebook, chatting on Whatsapp, banking, 
homework, email , and even for use of the calculator and dictionary.  
Gender norms around what expected after marriage especially hinder married women from using 
digital technology. Married women in male -dominated contexts are often expected to devote all 
of their time to their family doing childcare, housework, cooking, and sometimes paid work on top 
of all that. Rural women tend to have even less time to get acquainted with or use digital 
technology beca use they often spend hours tending to farmland on top of doing everything that 
urban women do and because errands and tasks that are easily completed in urban areas often 
take much longer for them to compete. Meanwhile men tend to have more free time after  work 
for leisure and socializing. Moreover, men tend to have more financial autonomy and power to 
make decisions around handset ownership and Internet usage and thus tend to have more 
freedom (Croxson and Rowntree , 2017) .  
Moreover, adolescent girls often face barriers that the rest of population do not. although 98% of 
people in Bangladesh are believed to have the required documentation needed to register a SIM 
card (Financial Inclusion Insights 2018b) , Girl Effect (2018)  finds that SIM card registration is 
more problematic for girls in Bangladesh whom are less likely to have the required identification 
documents, meaning when they  own a phone they are often unable to get it connected.  
4. Financial Services  
Digital financial services refer to ‘Financial services provided through an electronic platform (e.g., 
mobile phones, debit or credit electronic cards, internet)’ (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2017 : 3). 
Thus, this definition includes but goes beyond mobile money. Digital financial inclusion ‘counts 
individuals who have an account in their name with a full -service financial institution that offers 
digital services (e.g., online account access, debit/ATM card, credit card, electronic cash 
transfers)’ (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2017 : 3). While 18% of the Bangladeshi population 
experience digital financial inclusion via mobile money, 13% do through Banks, and 3% thro ugh 
Nonbank Financial Institutions (NBFI) (e.g. microfinance institutions) adding up to 28% of the 
adult population ). InterMedia’s Financial Inclusion Insights (FII) programme finds that although 
mobile money is a key driver for financial inclusion in Ken ya, Tanzania in Uganda, banks and 
microfinance institutions remain the primary financial inclusion drivers .10 
Use of mobile money is low in Bangladesh. Only 18% of adults were registered mobile money 
users in 2018. However, 27% of the adult population also performed mobile money transactions 
                                                   
9 This figure includes girls that own a mobile phone (53%) but still borrow another one  
10 http://www.finclusion.org/about/  14 using someone else’s account. (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . Like digital technology in 
general, access to digital financial services is not binary. The majority of mobile money users in 
Bangladesh are ‘basic users’ meaning they mainly use their accounts to transfer money to others 
or to deposit or withdraw cash. Meanwhile only 4% of adults in Bangladesh were ‘ advanced 
digital finance users’ in 2017, meaning they used mobile money for more ad vanced banking 
functions like saving, borrowing, insurance, paying bills, investing, or receiving wages (Financial 
Inclusion Insights , 2018a) .  
The Government of Bangladesh has been actively promoting digital finance. It has rolled ou t 
several initiatives with aims to enhance digital financial inclusion including the Perspective Plan 
of Bangladesh 2010 to 2021 —also known as Vision 2021  Digital Bangladesh —which aims to 
leverage ICTs to realise socioeconomic transformation (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . 
Access to Information (a2i) is a public sector innovation agency seeking to enhance digital 
financial inclusion in Bangladesh through its Digital Financial Services (DFS) Lab in partnership 
with the Central Ba nk of Bangladesh (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . Among other things, 
the lab provides financial literacy training programmes and hosts learning centres. One 
prominent DFS Lab initiative is a planned nation -wide payment system c arried out in partnership 
with bKash, Bangladesh’s leading mobile money provider , seeking to make financial services 
more readily available for poor and rural Bangladeshis .11 The initiative seeks to safeguard 
against leaving the unconnected behind through t he creation of 4,500 computer centres that 
people without mobile access can visit to be financially included. 1,200 of the computer centres 
seek to provide more advanced mobile financial services (apolitical , 2017) .  
The government has also introduced other reforms aiming increase digital financial inclusion. 
The government is currently promoting the use of ‘agent bankers’ (licenced agents acting as 
bank tellers) as a form of reaching customers in more remote areas. Moreover, the government 
has sought to promote mobile money registration penetration by tightening mobile money 
transaction rules to limit the use of mobile money by users that only access mobile money 
through the accounts of others  (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) .  
Access to a mobile phone is necessary , but insufficient , to use mobile money. In 2017, 81% of 
the population in Bangladesh used mobile phones to call someone yet only 13% used a mobile 
phone to complete a financial transaction (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . 74% of people 
between the ages of 15 and 65 own a mobile phone in Bangladesh (LIRNE asia, 2018 ). Yet only 
18% of the population between the ages of 15 and 65 are mobile money users and only 14% 
have active accounts.12 A recent survey found that only 27% of people that own mobile phones 
in Bangladesh use mobile money and 3% use mobile banking  (LIRNEas ia, 2018) . Using a mobile 
phone for financial activity still remains a relatively advanced use of mobile phones. The following 
analysis based on the 5As aims to help illustrate some of the barriers that limit mobile money use 
by other 73% of Bangladeshi  mobile phone owners.  
Digital Finance Availability  
Mobile money is only available on mobile phones equipped with a mobile money enabled sim 
card. As of 2017, 76% of adults in Bangladesh reported owning a sim  card and 84% reported 
                                                   
11 This was meant to be launched in 2018, but I could not find if it actually was ever launched or not.  
12 http://www.finclusion.org/topic/mobile -money.html#dataAtAGlance  15 having access to a mobile  phone either through ownership or borrowing (Financial Inclusion 
Insights , 2018a) . Availability of network coverage can be a barrier even when someone owns a 
mobile phone equipped with a mobile money ready sim  card. Where there is no  network 
coverage, mobile money transactions cannot be completed. Moreover, mobile money 
transactions can be limited or untrustworthy when network coverage is spotty or unstable. 
Around half of mobile money users in Bangladesh have reported experiences whe re they visited 
a mobile money agent to transact only to find that the system or mobile network was down 
(Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . 
Similar to how digital infrastructure tends to be built in places with buying power first, there is 
evidence that the prevalence of mobile money a gents follows a similar pattern. Some of the 
barriers to expanding mobile money coverage to rural areas uncovered by Frydrych and Aschim 
(2014 : 3) include ‘more widely dispersed populations, lower literacy levels, less access to basic 
infrastructure, and lower and often sporadic household incomes’ as well as a l ack of formal 
documentation for rural residents. Thus, even when a particular geography is covered by a 
mobile signal, it still may not make economic sense for private mobile operators and their 
partners to further build the infrastructure necessary to pro vide ‘pro -poor digital services’ if it is 
disproportionately made up of people already at risk being left behind.  
In 2017, 59% of adults in Bangladesh knew of a mobile money agent within 1 km from their home 
and 69% knew of a retail store with a mobile mo ney kiosk within 1 km.  On the other hand , only 
35% and 28% were aware of a bank branch or banking agent within 1 km. When the distance is 
expanded to 5 kms, 77% and 76 % of Bangladeshis knew where to find a mobile money and bank 
branch , respectively , sugges ting that mobile money is more readily available closer to people’s 
homes (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . However, 5% of the population still claimed that the 
nearest mobile money agent was over 5 kms away in 2017. On the other  hand, Automated Teller 
Machines (ATM) are rarer. Only 25% of adults reported knowing of an ATM within a kilometre 
from their home , and 14% of the adult population were aware of an ATM located more than 5 
kms from their home (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) .  
In Bangladesh, like many other countries, an official ID is required to register a mobile money 
account. On the surface, this barrier seems negligible since 98% of adults are reported to have 
the necessary ID required in 2017 (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . However, 20% of 
unregistered mobile money users cite not having required identification documents as a reason 
for not obtaining their own mobile money account (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . This 
barrier seems to be more restrictive for adolescent girls in Bangladesh who have cited lack of 
identification as barrier to getting a SIM card (Girl Effect , 2018) . 
How readily available mobile phones are also affects how likely someone is to use mobile 
money. People who own mobile phones are more likely to use mobile money than people who 
only borrow mobile phones. For example, adolescent girls that own mobile phones are more than 
twice as likely to use them for banking than girls that only borrow them (Girl Effect , 2018) . 
Digital Finance Affordability  
Globally, mobile money pricing tends to be regressive rather than pro -poor (Holloway  et al. ,  
2017) . Larger transactions usually incur less fees in percentage terms that are higher for smaller 
amounts. This means that th e poor who are more likely to make smaller transactions end up 
paying more to make a mobile money transaction in percentage terms. However, it is worth 16 noting that when compared to five other prominent mobile money providers in other countries13, 
bKash (Ban gladesh’s most popular mobile money provider) was found to be the cheapest. ‘F or 
small amounts, it’s much, much cheaper than any other comparable services around the world ’ 
(Amin , 2014) . Unlike its peers, bKash does not charge to put money in and it charges a flat low 
percent fee regardless of the amount of money being withdrawn making it more equitable than 
regressive mobile money providers like M -Pesa in Kenya. However, there are still elements of 
regressive pricing since it charges a flat fee to transfer money to other  accounts which would be 
higher in percentage terms for smaller amounts of money transferred.   
Although bKash may be more pro poor than mobile money providers in other countries, 
Affordability is still a barrier to mobile money adoption in Bangladesh. Peo ple living above the 
poverty line in Bangladesh are 33% more likely to access mobile money than people living below 
the poverty line (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . People living below the poverty line are 
30% less likely to use basic mobile money services than people living above t he poverty line 
(Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . The gap is even more striking for more advanced digital 
services. People living below poverty line are half (3 % vs. 6%) as likely to use mobile money for 
advanced services than pe ople above the poverty line, and significantly less like likely (7 % vs. 
12%) less likely to access advanced digital services from a formal bank (Financial Inclusion 
Insights , 2018a) .  
There is no use for mobile money if people do not have money to spend. 40% of mobile money 
non-users in Bangladesh say they do not use mobile money because they do not have enough 
money to make transactions (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . Moreover, seasonality and 
income security must be taken into account when thinking of mobile m oney affordability. People 
with irregular and seasonal incomes are significantly more likely to be non -users, unregistered 
users, and registered but inactive users than salaried users who are more likely to be active and 
advanced users (Financial Incusion Insights , 2018b) .  
Digital Finance  Awareness  
Access to mobile phones more generally do not necessarily lead to the awareness or usage of 
any digital service or application. Although mobile phone ownership is high, 82% of people over 
the age of 15 do not use mobile money. A lack of awarenes s of mobile money and its usefulness 
is a major obstacle to financial inclusion in Bangladesh. 41% of mobile money non -users say 
they do not know what mobile money can be used for (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . This 
lack of awareness also translates into a lack of demand. 54% and 48% of adults in Bangladesh 
say they lack the need for mobile money or prefer to use cash respectively (Financial Inclusion 
Insights , 2018b) .  
Moreover, awareness of where to go for mobile money services is also a barr ier in Bangladesh. 
17% of the population do not know where the nearest mobile money agent is (Financial Inclusion 
Insights 2018a) . Regarding more general digital banking services, 32% of the population does 
not know where nearest ATM is.  
                                                   
13 The five other services and their respective host countries were: M -PESA in Kenya, MTN in Uganda, 
Vodaphone in Tanzania, GCash in the Philippines, and easypaisa in Pakistan  17 Digital Finance Ability  
Only 9% of adults in Bangladesh have complete ability to perform a digital financial transaction 
and 7% have only ‘some ability’ to do so. Meanwhile, 78% of people have no ability to perform 
mobile financial transactions14 (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . Along with ability to navigate 
digital device, effective use of digital financial services requires users to be financially literate. A 
survey in 2017 showed that only 29% of adult population in Bangladesh are financially literate 
(Finan cial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) .Moreover, there are two sides to every transaction. 13% of 
mobile money users in Bangladesh have come across a mobile money agent that did not know 
how to perform a transaction (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . 
Digital Finance Agency  
As mentioned ear lier, social norms offline often lead to women being less likely to use digital 
technologies. This is also often true for specific applications and services which rely on digital 
technology such as mobile money. The Financial Inclusion Insights (2017b)  programme found 
that non -users (both male and female) tend to have less influence, voice, and autonomy on 
personal and household financial decisions than advanced users. Whereas only 19% of female 
non-users (and 43% of male non -users) report having almost all influence on fi nal decisions on 
household spending, 37% of female advanced users and 61% of male advanced users report the 
same. Thus, being an advanced mobile money user is correlated with greater financial 
autonomy.  
Moreover autonomy increases for both men and women a s they go through the ‘user journey’ 
from non -user, to unregistered user, to registered user to advanced users. However, the gender 
gap in financial autonomy between men and women remains significant at all stages suggesting 
that becoming an advanced user of digital financial services on its own does not close the 
autonomy gap between men and women. ‘Progress on the customer journey from unregistered 
to advanced user is empowering for both men and women, but does not reduce the power 
differentials between g enders …. the gender gap … is no smaller for advanced than for 
unregistered user’ ( Financial Inclusion Insights , 2017b : 56).  
Negative attitudes towards women having the autonomy to run errands and to handle their own 
finances can also act as a barrier for them accessing mobile money even after women are 
provided with autonomy by their immediate social circles. At least 12% of mobile money users in 
Bangladesh have reported coming across a mobile money agent that was dismissive of women 
(Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . This figure includes both female  and male respondents. 
Thus, this stat is likely to under -represent the prevalence of mobile money agents discriminating 
against women because male respondents may be less likely to notice mobile agents being 
dismissive of women.  
Access to digital finance  in Bangladesh , like in other places , is gendered. Men are more than 
twice as likely (25 vs 11%) to be mobile money users (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . This 
gap mirrors but is significantly larger than the gender gap between users of formal banks of 24 
vs. 20% (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018b) . Women in Bangla desh less likely to use mobile 
money both through their own registered accounts and via the accounts of other people 
                                                   
14 This figure adds the 61% who said they had no ability with the 17% who said they did not know if they had the 
ability given the latter group likely has no experience doing so  18 (Financial Inclusion Insights , 2018a) . They are also less likely to use it for the range of activities 
that mobile mo ney can be used for, both basic and advanced. Whereas 15% of men in 
Bangladesh use mobile money for basic activities (depositing, withdrawing, and transferring 
money), only 6% of women do. Women (2%) are also less likely to engage in more advanced 
digital finance activities like borrowing, saving, insurance, etc. than men (5%) (Financial Inclusion 
Insights 2018b) .  
Along with gender, mobile money inequalities mirror other forms of oppression, specifically those 
relating to poverty and geography. Rural residents and people living below the p overty line are 
also less likely to be non -users than urban residents and people living above the poverty line. 
Moreover, trends show that rural residents (72%) and people living below the poverty line (76%) 
disproportionately make up unregistered mobile m oney users in Bangladesh (Financial I nclusion 
Insights 2018b) . Furthermore, poorer and more marginalized users are less likely to use mobile 
money for more diverse and advanced financial activities. The percentage of adults using mobile 
money for advanced activities in urban areas (6%) is double the percentage in ru ral areas (3%). 
Likewise, 12% of people in urban areas access advanced services via a bank while only 7% do 
in rural areas.  
5. e-Health  
SDG 3.8 calls for universal health coverage ‘including financial risk protection, access to quality 
essential health -care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential 
medicines and vaccines for all.’15 Due to their rapid spread in lower and middle income  countries, 
digital technologies , especially mobile phones , are seen as a potential tool for achi eving 
universal health coverage. Digital technologies provide the opportunity to strengthen health 
systems through improving the management of health facilities and programmes, the flow of 
information and advice to patients and health workers and enhancing  relationships between 
frontline health workers and highly qualified doctors (Bloom et al. , 2017) . Mobile health 
applications (known as mHealth) have been promoted as potential solutions to improve a range 
of health outcomes including but not limited to nutritio n, infectious disease outbreaks, and 
immunisation tracking. mHealth applications typically involve the delivery of health information 
through voice channels (e.g. Interactive Voice Response (IVR)), text messaging (e.g. SMS) or 
through online content and ap ps (e.g. websites, Facebook or WhatsApp) (GSMA and Frog , 
2017) . Due to the actions afforded by digital technology, mHealth is expected to reduce health 
care delivery costs and burdens on existing health i nfrastructure  (GSMA and Frog, 2017) .     
However, reviews show that very few digitally enabled health services successfully scale 
(Agarwal et al., 2016) . Success, where it does exist, has been concentrated in interventions 
addressing narrow (rather multifaceted or systemic) health issues (e.g. improving the timeliness 
of routine immunisation ). Only a few interventions have been shown to lead  to improved decision 
making by the public or health workers. Very few e -health have been able to achieve impact on 
health services and outcomes at scale (Agarwal  et al., 2015; Aranda -Jan et al., 2014; Blo om et al. , 
2017; Free  et al. , 2013 a; Free  et al. , 2013 b; Hall  et al., 2014; Lee et al. , 2016) .  
                                                   
15 https://www.who.int/sdg/tar gets/en/  19 Similar to digital finance, m -Health has been put on the national agenda in Bangladesh through 
its inclusion in the country’s ICT policy ‘Vision 2021 Digital  Bangladesh.’ This is reflected in the 
prevalence of m -health projects in the country. According to GSMA’s mHealth Tracker, there are 
currently at least 23 mHealth initiatives in Bangladesh (including initiatives both in the planning 
and deployment phases)  as of April 2019.16 Despite a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of 
mHealth more generally, there are signs of mHealth users in Bangladesh extracting gains from 
them. Khatun et al.  (2016: 51 ) found that villagers in rural Bangladesh that use mHealth  services 
report benefitting from them: ‘Participants who used mobile phones for healthcare were 
considerably enthusiastic of the concept, and were attracted by the speed and easy access 
through which they can contact medical expertise during an emergency and outside the usual 
health provider hours of business’. They found that mHealth users in rural Bangladesh see it as a 
source of easy access to qualified doctors in places where there are a shortage of them. It is also 
seen as a cost saver (both consultat ion fees and transport fees) and time saver. Participants 
expressed that mHealth could be especially beneficial for the poor in rural Bangladesh.  
However, mHealth users tended to be the more educated and wealthy. Participants expressed 
concern that althou gh the poor stand to gain the most from mHealth, the poor may be less able 
to benefit from mHealth because of a lack of access, and language and digital literacy (Khatun et 
al., 2016) . As the rest of this section will show, a lthough digital technologies can be leveraged to 
improve health  coverage  in Bangladesh , many people still face significant barriers. The U niversal 
Health Coverage  movement seeks to target the poor and marginali sed, the same groups that are 
also less likely to be included digitally. Whilst poor people increasingly own and use digital 
technology, for the most left behind communities, digital technology as a means for health 
coverage can be like trying to transport medical supplies by truck to a rural village not served by 
roads. Until the universal digital coverage goal is met, the contribution of digital to the UHC goal 
will remain limited  unless we simultaneously find ways to cover those that remain offline.  
e-Health Availability  
‘Infrastructure is one of the principal challenges to scale and sustainability of mHealth iniaitives 
… especially with regards to network coverage, supply of electricity, and Internet access’ (Evans 
et al. , 2018) . A lack of access  to electricity can act as a hinderance to access to mHealth if users 
are unable to charge the ir phones. Moreover, infrastructure and its reliability may vary between 
and within different places in the same country meaning that a one -size-fits all m -health solution 
is unlikely to be effective everywhere. mHealth initiatives have the best chance of succeeding 
when they account for differences in regards to the technologies and devices used (Evans et al.  
2018) .    
As mentioned earlier , network coverage is not binary. Although users with intermittent or spotty 
access should be abl e to get their messages eventually once they enter a place with coverage or 
their coverage returns, intermittent access can be a hinderance to registering to mHealth 
services in the first place. GSMA and Frog (2017)  suggest that even when users are 
technologically savvy and literate, network outages or connection errors could mean that their 
mHealth registration fails. In their experience users will only try to register up to three times and 
then give up. Because of this, they recommend having staff members visit people to sign them 
up in person ensuring that any further technical difficulties will be taken care of as well as helping 
                                                   
16 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/m4d -tracker/mhealth -deployment -tracker/  20 less tech savvy users register. Similarly, Agarwal et al.  (2015) found that poor network reception 
is common challenge for frontline health workers participating in mHealth service iniatiatives.  
Although, some mHealth services utili se features supported by basic mobile phones like text 
messages and Interactive Voice Response (IVR), Internet enabled devices are needed to access 
many e -Health services that run on websites or apps. As mentioned earlier, although 74% of 
people in Banglade sh own mobile phones, only a small percentage (13%) of people in 
Bangladesh use the Internet and only 18% own smartphones.17 This means that the majority of 
the population in Bangladesh would currently be unable to access digital health services 
requiring I nternet access or a mobile App. When mHealth services are designed only for the ICT 
upper class, the poor and marginalised are left behind. Tariq and Durrani (2018: pg. 20)  suggest 
that mHealth initiatives should design for devices that people in the context are already using. ‘ if 
the devices are similar to the type of phones that the [user]  already possess, higher adoption 
rates may be more achievable. ’ This sentiment is echoed by other scholars (Evans et al. , 2018 ). 
Unsurprisingly , an mHealth study in rural Bangladesh, found that most people used basic phones 
without Internet capabilities (Khatun et al.  2016) .  
Moreover, some mHealth applications utilising ‘frontier technologies’ are only available on more 
powerful devices like smartphones and computers connected to the Internet. However, chatting 
to these bots requires the user to own a smartphone or computer capable of accessing 
messaging apps and Internet data putting them out of the reach of most people in Bangladesh 
where smartphone ownership and Internet connectivity is low. The same can be said about 
telemedicine initiative s seeking to use Artificial Intelligence to filter patients with mild illnesses 
that do not require hospital visits (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . These services are not yet available 
on basic and feature phones.   
As mentioned in the connectivity section, availability of relevant content in one’s local language is 
often a barrier for Internet uptake (Roberts and Hernandez 2019) . Khatun et al.  (2016)  found that 
many people in rural Bangladesh struggled understanding mHealth messages because they 
were in English, a language they didn’t have sufficient proficiency in. Moreover, many people 
struggled to respond to messages that required them to use the E nglish alphabet rather than an 
alphabet they were already familiar with. Similarly, Pitaloka (2018)  found that mHealth messages 
in Indonesia often contained words in both the local language and English with users often being 
expected to understand technical health terms in English. Similar to how a lack of content 
available in one’s language can act as a barrier to using the Internet in general, this is also true 
for chatbots. Languages spoken by Chatbots seem to mirror languages  for which content is 
available online. 90% of Facebook Chatbots speak English.18  
Moreover, some mHealth applications have made the mistake of promoting that their users take 
actions that are unavailable to them. For example, mNutrition applications may su ggest that 
users eat food or buy a product that is not available in their local area (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . 
Moreover, a survey of rural mHealth users in Bangladesh found that mHealth doctors sometimes 
                                                   
17 This figure was arrived at  by multiplying the percentage of people who own mobile phones (74%) by the 
percentage of mobile phone owners that own smartphones (24%)  
18 https://ventur ebeat.com/2017/07/19/the -10-languages -chatbots -are-most -likely -to-speak/  21 prescribe medicines over text message that are not available in the user’s local vicinity (Khatun 
et al.  2016) .  
As mentioned earlier, some users can only access devices through borrowing rather than having 
access to their own device. The effects of sharing on usage patterns by borrowers ha s been 
analysed. Girls that borrow phones are less likely to use them for a diverse set of activities 
including to seek health advice (Girl Effect 2018) . 
e-Health Affordability  
Even when users have access to a free or affordable m -health application and can easily 
understand the information being shared and recommendations the service makes, acting upon 
that information may be cost prohibited for the user to benefit from the recommendations (GSMA 
and Frog , 2017) . For example, the application may suggest that the user eat more expensive 
food regularly.  
The evidence base for mHealth data entry being more cost effective than paper based systems 
is still  insufficient (Evans et al.  2018) . For frontline health care workers, inputting digital data can 
often take longer than inputting data into paper which adds time needed for health care workers 
to complete their jobs, often without ext ra pay (Agarwal et al. , 2015; Tariq and Durrani , 2018 ). 
Tariq and Durrani (2018)  found that the need to  work overtime to input data without pay may led 
many female health workers in Pakistan to decide to switch job sites. Moreover, others have 
found that frontline health workers who do not see gains in efficiency from using mobile phones 
are more likely to disengage and lose motivation at later stages of the project (Evans et al.  2018) .  
Moreover, being responsible for expensive devices that can cost more than a month of a health -
workers pay can add new stress for frontline health worke rs. In Pakistan some even worried that 
family members with drug addictions might steal their devices for drug money (Tariq and Durrani 
2018) . 
m-Health and e -health Initiatives tend to depend on donor funding which is unsustainable in the 
long-run (Bloom et al.  2017) . Rather than a primary source of funding, GSMA and Frog (2017)  
suggest that donor funding should be approached as seed funds with mHealth applications 
seeking to establish [at least three] other funding channels to ensure sustainability. Establishing 
to what exten t mHealth initiatives in Bangladesh are dependent on donor funding is beyond the 
scope of this literature review, but is something that should be looked into.  
e-Health Awareness  
A household survey of 800 households by Bloom et al.  (2017)  involving mainly lower income 
households showed that very few poor people in Bangladesh are aware of websites where they 
could seek health information or of SMS based health messages. On the other end, college 
students in Bangladesh —a group of the populat ion that is more likely to come from more 
privileged backgrounds, be literate, and own mobile phones, and thus belong to the ICT upper 
class —were shown to be active users of the Internet for health information, particularly for sexual 
health information (Waldman et al.  2018) . Similarly, Khatun et al.  (2016)  found that awareness of 
mHealth and its potential benefits in a rural village in Bangladesh were limited to the better off: 
the highly educated, community leaders, and healthcare providers. Meanwhile, community 
members with no or little formal education were found to have no awareness of existing mHealth 
initiatives. Similar to findings from the connectivity section, the study found that only the better off 
were aware of text messaging, a mobile phone activity that is often a prerequisite to engage in 22 mHealth. ‘ Only educated people and students were aware of text messages and frequently 
communicated with text messages ’ (Khatun et al.  2016 : pg. 52 ). Moreover, mHealth awaren ess 
was found to be gendered with rural women being the least likely to be aware of mHealth 
services (Khatun et al.  2016) .  
Moreover, awareness can be an issue for designers of mHealth initiatives as much as users. 
Some mHealth initaitves have failed to consider how external —mainly weste rn—concepts of 
health, medicine, and nutrition may be at odds with the beliefs and practices of the people they 
are targeted to. In some cases, a concept or similar word (e.g. Nutrition) may not exist in a 
specific language or culture (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . Thus, designers and implementers of 
mHealth solutions must make sure they understand the context as much as possible including 
how people think about the issue, what people currently do about it and why . This requires 
spending time with users and having frequent contact and feedback from them. Furthermore, 
mHealth messages are typically written by external health experts living far away from target 
recipients with a limited understanding of local languag es, dialects, regional nuances in 
language, or how widespread use of technical terms (e.g. calories) may be. Framing messages 
in ways that targeted audiences can understand can be challenging (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . To 
overcome this barrier, it is necessary to test content with users involving them in the creation of 
content when possible and to never assume that users will understand any given message.  
e-Health Ability  
As mentioned earlier, a lack of language literacy —the ability to read and write —can be a barrier 
to effective use of digital technology. Khatun et al.  (2016)  found that rural Bangladeshis typically 
did not open their text messages or deleted them because they were unabl e to read them. Some 
respondents emphasi sed that they only know how to make and receive phone calls. Thus 
participants said they preferred to receive audio messages. The inability to read messages is 
especially an issue when messages are received in Englis h. Moreover, health care providers 
surveyed were concerned that illiterate mHealth users may be unable to understand the name of 
the medicine they have been prescribed via text message (Khatun et al.  2016) . Moreover, 
registering to an mHealth initiative can be difficult for users, especi ally those that are less 
technologically savvy (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . GSMA and Frog (2017)  suggest that in person 
registration should be used as an opportunity to introduce users to different features of the 
mHealth application and to teach people how to use it.  
Frontline health workers [and users] with low literacy or writing skills are likely to have trouble 
with mHealth applications that are text heavy (Agarwal et al.  2015) . Tariq and Durrani (2018)  found 
that in a similar context —one where basic phones were most prevalent — female health workers 
had trouble adjusting to touch screen data entry keypads. Older people are less likely to have the 
digital skills necessary to make effective use of mobile phones (World Bank 2016) . Tariq and 
Durrani (2018)  witnessed a situation where an elderly female frontline health worker transferred 
health sites because of her lack of comfort with using a mobile device for data entry.  
Even when frontline health workers own their own mobile phones and are able to use it 
effectively in their daily lives, this does not mean that these skills will necessarily translate to 
health worker bei ng able to effectively use mHealth applications (Evans et al.  2018) . Further 
training may still be required. A systemic review by Agarwal et al.  (2015)  found that when given 
proper training, frontline health workers were able to learn how to use mobile phones when 
provided. The amount of time required for training ranged from hours to a few weeks depending 23 on the front line health workers existing digita l literacy and the scope of the m -health initiative. 
Training for frontline health workers may include an introduction of the functions of mobile phone, 
be provided with pictographic instructions on how to use mobile phones, be taught how to use 
accompanyi ng software, and how to address technical difficulties when they arrive. Training of 
Frontline Health Workers has been shown to significantly decrease error rates in data entry. 
However training frontline health workers to implement mHealth interventions c an often be a 
challenge in itself and often goes under -budgeted or not given sufficient time (Agarwal et al.  2015) .  
e-Health Agency  
As mentioned earlier, social norms can affect whether or not marginali sed groups of people have 
access to technology and what is seen as acceptable behaviour for them once they are 
connected (Croxson and Rowntree 2017; Girl Effect 2018) . In a study of e -health initiatives in 
Bangladesh, Bloom et al.  (2017)  found that access to mobile phones mirrored gender relations 
and power dynamics within households. Women  in Bangladesh often had their access to phones 
mediated by their husbands or fathers who also had control over their finance and social 
interactions with the ultimate result of limiting access to health information for women. As 
mentioned earlier, Khatun et al.  (2016)  also found that women were the least likely to be aware of 
mHealth services  
GSMA and Frog (2017)  suggest that mHealth interventions should be developed using user -
centered design princi ples with ethnographic studies and/or interviews being carried out to learn 
how mHealth target audiences currently receive information, access services, experience the 
issue being tackled, and how they access to and use technology. Moreover, they suggest 
mHealth interventions design must go beyond understanding individuals but also understand 
how those individuals may fit into power relations in their environment, which actors in their 
community are most likely to be trusted sources of information or influe nce their decisions, and 
any social or cultural beliefs that may hinder behavioural change. Understanding the target user’s 
context is especially important when they have little autonomy. ‘ Especially in rural settings, 
women often do not have access to mob ile phones. They might not own a phone, be illiterate, or 
do not have the skills to use a phone. In these cases, they will rely on their husband, family or 
community to pass on information. When engaging only the intended target audience, and not all 
of the people who can contribute to behaviour change, it is unlikely that actionable change will 
occur ’ (GSMA and Frog 2017 pg. 25) .  
Moreover, gender norms can act as a barrier to female health workers trying to implement 
mHealth initiatives.  
In many lower and middle income countries, citizens often do not trust the healthcare system or 
are may not be accustomed to relying on external health information. In some places, people 
have even encountered fake drugs in government clinics (GSMA and Frog , 2017) . In these 
cases, previous experiences with ineffective , and even dangerous , healthca re in general may 
lead potential mHealth users to distrust in any outsiders approaching them with health advice. 
Meeting potential users face to face in the early stages (especially registration) is proposed as a 
way to build trust in such envir onments. So me of these concerns were echoed in a mHealth 
Study in rural Bangladesh. Some participants did not trust that the doctors they spoke to over the 
phone and those providing medicine prescriptions via text messages when using mHealth 
services were indeed qual ified doctors and thus preferred to meet doctors face to face (Khatun et 
al. 2016) .   24 On a positive note, participants in a mHealth survey in rural Bangladesh expressed that mHealth 
could make it easier for women speak to doctors about issues that may otherwise be taboo (e.g. 
sexually tr ansmitted diseases and diseases related to the female genital tract) to speak to a male 
doctor face to face about (Khatun et al.  2016) . However, given that social norms may negatively 
affect the agency of women to be connected and subsequently to use mHelath applications, the 
poorest and  most marginalised women in Bangladesh are at risk of falling behind women with 
more agency in terms of having access to information concerning their health and even 
treatment.  
6. Online Education  
Students in Low and Middle Income countries  are relatively di sadvantaged compared to those in 
high income countries due to a shortage of good teachers and physical schools as well as 
prohibitive costs (travel, textbooks, uniforms, learning materials, etc.) to schooling. Some argue 
that the cost of traditional educat ion is rising whilst, online Learning provides the opportunity to 
improve access to education in Low and Middle Income Countries  countries while decreasing 
costs related to attaining (e.g. books, room and board, etc.) and providing (e.g. wages, physical 
space, administrative and utility costs, etc.) an education (Ally and Sama ka 2013; Oluwatobi and 
Olurinola 2015) . Moreover, they make the case that online education presents an opportunity to 
level the playing field by requiring fewer (if any) teachers and decreasing the need to visit a 
physical school and providing education  free of charge (Ally and Samaka 2013) . This section 
covers barriers to online education uncovered from a review of three types of online education 
initiatives: Massive Online Open Courses ( MOOCs ), mLearning, and Open Educational 
Resources (OER).  
Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) are courses offered over the Internet to anyone who 
wishes to take them free of charge or for a very small fee (Liyanagunawardena and Aboshady 
2017) . Some MOOC platforms like Coursera and edX provide learners the opportunity to take a 
series of related courses that allow the learner to show mastery of the subject such as 
Coursera’s ‘Specializations’ and edX’s ‘XSeries’. Along with being a potential source of high 
quality education from instructors from some of the world ’s top universities, MOOCs have been 
promoted as a tool to help equip the masses with knowledge on how tackle comple x 
development problems and help equip learners with tools to respond to humanitarian 
emergencies (Liyanagunawardena and Aboshady , 2017) . One MOOC titled ‘ Understan ding the 
Ebola Virus and How You Can Avoid It ’ on Alison.com was translated into several languages and 
was used as part of a rapid response to train tens of thousands of people quickly about the 
emerging Ebola crisis including health workers (Liyanagunawardena and Aboshady 2017) . Khan 
Academy is a famous free and open online learning platform for all ages that resembles a MOOC 
where learners can watch instructional videos, complete practice exercises, and access a 
personalised learning dashboard allowing them to study at their own pace.19 Grameen Phone 
and the Agami Education Foundation have partnered to translate Khan Academy ’s online online 
                                                   
19 https://www.khanacademy.org/about  25 personalised education to ols (courses, lessons and practice) into Bangla and localise the content 
for learners in Bangladesh.20  
M-learning refers to the use of ‘handheld technologies and mobile phone networks to ‘facilitate, 
support, enhance and extend the reach of teaching and le arning’  et al., 2011) . M-learning could 
prove part icularly useful for users that are unable to visit a physical school or for whom a quality 
education is unattainable where they reside. For example, UNESCO (2018a)  argues that 
mLearning may be a promising face to face educational compliment for refugees, especially 
those facing trauma and mental health difficulties. However, despite all its hype, there is a lack of 
evidence of effective m -Learning in practice with most reports and articles being descriptive or 
promotional ( Pouezevara , 2015) . Bangladesh Open University is among the  increasing number 
of higher education institutions attempting to leverage m -learning to increase access to 
education. ‘Recently BOU has developed mobile set compatible memory cards containing e -
books and audio -visual materials for the learners. BOU have u ploaded nearly 400 textbooks in 
the form of e -books of almost all its academic programs. It also developed multiple mobile apps 
and educational webpages for the learners as learning tools ’ (Islam and Numan , 2016 : 1). This 
approach builds on th eir existing Open and Distance Learning (ODL) model which is meant to 
widen access to education for people with limited access to conventional education which they 
argue has the greatest impact for women and girls. Along with this initiative, BOU already m akes 
all its learning materials available online in pdf format on its website and also uploads its audio 
and video programs to its website and YouTube channel.  
OERs  (e.g. education repositories) are free learning resources made available in the public 
domain that can be adapted, modified, or re -used by teachers to improve teaching or develop 
new courses. Although it was suggested that these resources would disproport ionately benefit 
students in  Lower and Middle Income Countries  since they have more to gain from them, 
Gunawardena (2014)  argues that OERs  may contribute to increasing social divides due to 
access to barriers and a lack of relevant content for people in the global south. ‘P oor people now 
have not only poor face -to-face education, but also poor access to high quality online courses 
and information ’ (Quote by Dutra de Oliveira Netol in Gunawardena 2014) . There are now 
concerns that OERs may  ‘reinforce global, regional and national economic and social inequalities 
through a digital divide  that benefits those with educational and technological access a nd skills, 
while bypassing those without ’ (de Oliveira Neto et al. , 2017: 71) . As the text in this section will 
illustrate, accessing these resources often requires a level of access to technology, disposable 
income, awareness of online educational resources, digital capacity and a gency that not all 
teachers in Lower and Middle Income Countries countries enjoy. Moreover, similar trends have 
been uncovered for MOOCs, mLearning, and Online education more generally.   
Unless the barriers below are reversed, online education may continu e to mainly benefit better 
off students, the already educated and the highly connected despite visions that OER, MOOCs, 
and m -Learning would disproportionately serve the poorest and most vulnerable who otherwise 
lack access to quality education (Hillier , 2018) .  
                                                   
20 https://www.grameenphone.com/about/media -center/press -release/khan -academy -now-
available -bangla  26 Online Education Availability  
Access to hardware (computers, laptops, mobile phones, etc.) and connectivity (Wifi and mobile 
broadband) have been identified as necessary but insufficient for teachers in th e global south to 
utilise OERs  in the classroom (de Oliveira Neto et al.  2017) . A lack of electricity in Rural 
Bangladesh and intermittent access to electricity in most cities in Bangladesh has already been 
identified as a barrier to introducing ICT in rural classrooms (Khan, Hasan and Clement 2012) . 
Lack of reliable power in schools can also act as a hindrance to the use of OER by teachers 
(Mtebe and Raisamo 2014) . 
It was previously noted that the majority of students in MOOCs were from developed countries 
(Liyanagunawardena, Williams and Adams 2013) . However, this seems to be slowly changing at 
least for some MOOC platforms. In 2017, 45% of the 24 million students using Coursera’s 
platform were from Lower and Middle Income Countries  (Cheney 2017) . Many MOOCs are 
offered by instructors from top universities (e.g. MIT and Harvard) like the ones on Coursera or 
Edx. Although these courses are online, they are largely based on traditional cla ssroom learning 
and thus heavily rely on video lectures followed by interactive quizzes or self -tests and provide 
students with the space to socially collaborate with others taking the course. Because they are 
data intensive, these courses are only fully a vailable to users with high and stable bandwidth and 
more powerful devices like smartphones, tablets or laptop/desktop computers, which are often 
unavailable and unaffordable for people in Lower and Middle Income C ountries, especially the 
poor and people i n remote areas (Hori et al.  2016) . Only 4% of people in Bangladesh aged 
between 15 to 65 owns a laptop or desktop (LIRNEasia 2018) , and tablets account for just 1% of 
all web traffic in Bangladesh (We are Social 2018) . The tools necessary to have a decent MOOC 
experience are not available for most people in Bangladesh. Coursera and other MOOC 
platforms have improv ed their MOOC completion rates —especially in  Lower and Middle Income 
Countries  countries —by creating a mobile App version of their platforms that can run on 
smartphones (Cheney 2017) . Yet Basic and feature phones still dominate in B angladesh. 
Smartphone penetration in Bangladesh is just 18%21 putting people in Bangladesh at a 
disadvantage regarding their ability to access and complete MOOCs.  
Currently, most OERs  are in predominately English (Ally and Samaka 2013; Liyanagunawardena 
and Aboshady 2017) . Similarly, most MOOCs are delivered in English. English is not widely 
spoken in  Bangladesh. Bangladesh received a ‘low proficiency’ score and ranks 63rd out of 88 
countries ranked by English First (2018) . The poor and most marginalised are even less likely to 
speak English. This was one of the factors that led Grameen Phone and Agami Education 
Foundation to begin translating and localising Khan Academy —A MOOC -like w ebsite/online 
platform —for a Bangali audience. However, a glance at the Bangla version of the platform shows 
that the process has been slow. Only a fraction of the subjects covered in the English version of 
Khan Academy are available. At the time of writin g, it only included two overarching subjects: 
Mathematics and computing compared to the English version’s seven.22    
Northrop (2018)  argues that Although a UNESCO report sugges ts that mobile phone use 
promotes literacy in itself (West, Chew and UNESCO 2014) , research suggests that mobile 
                                                   
21 This figure was arrived at by multiplying the pe rcentage of people who own mobile phones (74%) by the 
percentage of mobile phone owners that own smartphones (24%)  
22 https://bn.khanacademy.org/  27 technology is not a silver bullet soluti on or a supplement for educational recourses but rather a 
tool that can help achieve educational outcomes if combined effectively with the availability of 
other tools in schools such as physical and logistical infrastructure, appropriate content (in the 
right language and knowledge level), teachers with the skills necessary to make use of digital 
tools, and interactive child -cantered learning methods (Northrop 2018) . As Toyama (2015b)  
argues ‘t echnology’s primary effect is to amplify human forces, so in education, techn ologies 
amplify whatever pedagogical capacity is already there ’. The ability for technology to amplify 
human forces positively will be challenging places marred by poor attendance (by students and 
teachers), unreliable electricity, high teacher turnover ra tes, and low budgets (Northrop 2018) . 
Northrop (2018)  argues that although mLearning has the potential to provide marginalized youth 
and women in Lower and Middle Income countries with materials that are necessary but 
insufficient to learn to read and write, physical books and textbooks are likely to remain 
necessary —but insufficient —supplements in places where mobile  penetration is low.  
People who are physically impaired or disabled may find it difficult to engage within mainstream 
mobile education unless they are designed to include assistive technologies (e.g. 
accelerometers, voice recognition, dictation tech, text  to speech, etc.) (Asabere 2013) . More 
work is needed to understand how inclusive online education initiatives are of people living with 
disabilities globally and inthe Bangali context.  
Online Education Affordability  
Even if content on an E -Learning pla tform is free, users are likely to incur costs to access the 
platform in the first place. Online education requires access to devices and access to the 
Internet, thus affordability can be a key barrier to acquiring the pre -requisites for participation. 
Even when users have access to devices and can afford data, they may choose not to use digital 
technology for educational if it requires them to pay. Hussin et al. (2012)  found that university 
students in Malaysia were welcoming of the idea of using mLe arning, but did not want to incur 
personal data fees in doing so.  
Although it is free to audit many MOOCs. Most MOOC platforms are for -profit and charge fees 
for certifications. Moreover, although some platforms claim to provide financial Aid for those in  
need23, it is unclear to what extent they are provided to people in Lower and Middle Income 
Countries and to what degree people in Lower and Middle Income C ountries —and the poor —are 
aware of and apply for it. Although MOOCs are in theory free to audit, wealthier people enrol and 
complete MOOCs at higher rates than less wealthy people even in the same country (Kizilcec, 
Saltarelli, Reich and Cohen 2017) . Thus, poorer people, especially those living in Lower and 
Middle Income C ountr ies are being left behind from potential credential gains from MOOCs.  
Although online learning is often presented as a cheaper alternative to traditional education, 
setting up an online learning system that includes a platform, a program, digital content,  trained 
personnel, etc. from scratch can be very expensive. Online learning only becomes cost effective 
once the system is built when students can be added at marginal costs (Burns 2019) . Moreover, 
Khan et al.  (2012)  argue that a lack of time of overburdened teachers is a major hindrance to the 
                                                   
23 https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en -us/articles/209819033 -Apply -for-Financial -Aid-or-a-
Scholarship  28 introduction of ICTs in the classroom because they are often not provided with sufficient time to 
learn how to use ICT hardware or software or plan for its introduction.  
Outside of the for -profit MOOC platforms, funding for mobile and digital technologies in  schools 
tends to be short -term, sporadic and dependent on funds donated by private corporations or 
donor agencies. Northrop (2018: pg. 9)  finds that although these funds provi de the necessary 
seed funding for pilot projects, ‘after the pilot phase ends, resources are usually not available to 
sustain the project.’  
Online Education Awareness  
Building an online education platform or app will not lead to any learning if users are u naware of 
it. As mentioned in the beginning of this section, Bangladesh Open University (BOU) has recently 
tried to distribute its learning materials via mobile memory cards and introduced apps and 
webpages for its learners. However, a survey found that 2/ 3rds of students and over 80% of 
tutors had never heard of the resources despite having favourable views on the use of mobile 
phones for educational purposes (Islam and Numan 2016) .  
Moreover, awareness of copyright and licensing requirements for using OER mate rials is a 
barrier to adoption for many instructors that are aware of OER and acts as a barrier for Scholars 
from the global south to share their resources with others as OER. Instructors who were aware of 
and agree with the ‘Open movement’ were most likel y to embrace OER and use it in their 
teaching (de Oliveira Neto et al.  2017) . 
This review was unable to uncover any literature looking into the awareness of online education 
by the general population in Lower and Middle Income C ountries and Bangladesh. However, the 
author was constrained in time. This topic requires further research.   
Online Education Ability  
Although some online education programs target illiterate users, most of them require users to 
read and write. Meanwhile many MOOCs are comparable to top tier university undergraduate 
and graduate courses in terms of difficulty. Thus, it is not surprising that the highly educated 
enrol and complete MOOCs at higher rates than people without formal education in the same 
country (Kizilcec et al.  2017) . 
Along with the ability to read and write, digital literacy is necessary to take advantage of online 
learning opportunities. Due to differing levels of digital literacy, online learning can give tech 
savvy learners an advantage over those that are not comfo rtable using digital technology. 
Moreover, a switch to mobile learning could add an extra burden to non tech saavy students and 
instructors who would be forced to both learn how to use digital technology and learn the material 
on the platform simultaneousl y (Asabere 2013) . Hillier (2018: pg. 110)  argues that ‘Individual 
remote and unconnected learners face a chicken and egg problem for engagement with 
contemporary e -learning offerings. Without connectivity, remote learners have no way of 
engaging with now common ICT intensified learning materials that are intended to teach them 
how to engage in an ICT intensive world’. The chicken and egg problem is also apparent in the 
training of teachers sinc e it is increasingly proposed that teachers leverage MOOCs to acquire 
digital skills to integrate ICTs into their classrooms (Hillier 2018; Laurillard 2014) . 29 Moreove r, online learning requires learners to learn in a new ways in which they go at their own 
pace, practice self -discipline, read and collaborate in forums, and are forced to be proactive. This 
mode of learning places ‘Do It Yourselves’ (DIY) demands on learn ers that are not common in 
traditional classrooms (Burns 2019) . It is not safe to assume that someone will embrace o nline 
learning environments just because they are digitally savvy and can read and write. Online 
learning requires time -management, self -regulation, and self -direction skills in addition to digital 
skills like reading and writing online, and an understandi ng of ‘Netiquette’ or online manners 
(Burns 2019) . Even digitally savvy users may require training to adapt from tra ditional to online 
learning.  
As mentioned earlier, the majority of MOOCs are in English making them inaccessible for non -
English speakers to. Even if students have some level of English, non -fluent English speakers 
may be less able to participate in the fo rums that accompany the courses (Liyanagunawardena et 
al. 2013) . English is not widely spoken in Bangladesh. Bangladesh received a ‘low proficiency’ 
score and ranks 63rd out of 88 countries ranked by English First (2018) . Moreover, the poor and 
most marginalized are less likely to speak English.  
A Lack of teacher ICT skills often holds them back from incorporating OER in the classrom (Ally 
and Samaka 2013) . For example, Mtebe and Raisamo (2014)  found that many higher education 
instructor s in Tanzania who were aware of OER lacked the skills and knowledge to access and 
make use of it. Research suggests that at least an intermediate level of digital literacy is 
necessary for teachers to adopt OER. de Oliveira Neto et al.  (2017)  found that instructors with only 
basic digital literacy were significantly  less likely to incorporate OER materials into their teaching 
than those with intermediate and advanced digital expertise across 9 countries in South America, 
Sub-Saharan Africa, and South and South East Asia.  
Online Education Agency  
Along with relying on  technologies that may be inaccessible to the poorest and most 
marginalized and people living in remote areas, MOOCs also suffer from a lack of relevant 
content for Lower and Middle Income Country  contexts (Hillier 2018) . The majority of OER 
materials are created in Western countries and thus their application may not be relevant in other 
contexts. In a study of Higher Education teachers in Tanzania, Mtebe and Raisamo (2014)  found 
that most teachers had trouble finding OER content relevant to their context. Similarly, although 
universities in the Global south are increasingly developing  MOOCs, mos t MOOCs are still 
created in developed countries. ‘ In order for online education to realize its full potential in the 
Lower and Middle Income Countries , there must be a shift away from the narrative that the 
Global North is the teacher and the Global South  is the student ’ (Cheney 2017) .  
Online education and education delivered through technology more broadly (E.g. television and 
radio) has a history of  being technocentric (Pouezevara 2015) . Although mLearning can be 
feasible for those with mobile phones from a purely technologi cal standpoint, pedagogical 
approaches that are appropriate for learning on mobile phones have lagged behind. Although  
‘culture affects how individuals think, act and behave in the e -learning environment, … e -learning 
systems [tend to] lack cultural featur es’ as well as features that take into account diversity among 
students (Chukwue re 2018 pg. 11) . Pouezevara (2015)  argues that m -learning may be at odds 
with cultural norms in some context around learning as a communal, collaborative or collective 
endeavour rather than something that happens individually or with values regarding information 
sources (e.g. elders as key sources of knowledge). Studies already show that dropout rates for 
online learning courses are very high (between 40 to 60%) (Burns 2019) . Studies suggest that 30 one of the greatest predictors of drop -out rates is whether students feel they receive enough 
support from their instructors and course mates.  
‘Few if any reforms can succeed without acc ommodating their impact and imprint on 
student learning needs and styles, teaching, school culture and climate, and 
administrative practices . Thus, it has long been considered inadvisable to simply 
implement an exciting technology in a classroom without he lping teachers understand 
how to maximize its use, teaching students about its capabilities, adapting materials to 
the local context, and engaging families and communities. Yet that has been the trend for 
nearly 20 years, as millions of computers, laptops,  and tablet programs have been left at 
schools’ doorsteps. ’ (Northrop 2018: pg. 2) .  
Acumen+ —a MOOC platform that focuses on tackling poverty —makes sure to source its case 
studies from a range of cultural contexts so that students taking their courses are more likely to 
relate to them. Moreover, Acumen+’s MOOCs are project based rather than lecture -based giving 
students the space to adopt what they learn to their own contexts (Cheney 2017) .  
Unfortunately, much of the thinking about online education has thought of it a top down 
endeavour where learning content is produced far away from users by teachers that have no 
exposure to the students they are reachi ng. For example, a well cited paper by Ally and Samaka 
(2013)  argued that  
“a lesson on mathematics can be developed and validated by experts at one educational 
organization and placed on the Internet for everyone to access rather than having 
millions of teachers around the world developing the same lesson. Having many teachers 
developing the same lesson topic is a misuse of human resources and a waste of 
teachers’ time.’  
Designers of mobil e learning initiatives that cross cultural boundaries need to take special care to 
accommodate cultural differences between themselves and and learners (Farley and Song 
2015) . Similar to mHealth initiatives, online education initiatives should be designed with users 
rather than for them.   
Self-esteem has been shown to affect MOOC usage and engagement in MOOC discussion 
forums. Kizilcec et al.  (2017  pg. 251 ) found that citizens from LDCs seeking to learn using MOOCs 
‘may suffer from the cognitive burden of wrestling with feeling unwelcome while trying to learn 
and, therefore, underperform. This can be exacerbated by social identity threat, which is the fear 
of being seen as less capable because of one’s group’ even though the environment has little 
social interaction.  
Men are much more likely to use their mobile phones for reading than women (West et al.  2014) . 
Beyond this finding, this report did not uncover further evidence of a gender bias in Online. 
However, it is likely to exist, especially in Bangladesh. Further research is needed.  
7. Recommendations  
Build offline chan nels to go along with the online : The Barriers to digital services in 
Bangladesh are acute and the poorest and most marginalized are most affectived by them. 
Services that are only available digitally threaten to leave these groups further behind.  DFID 31 funded programmes have  already  shown that building multiple channels including both online 
and offline channels improves inclusion of interventions (Feedback Mechanisms 2016) . 
Remember, digital access is not binary: Approaching digital access as binary does policy -
makers a disservice as it blinds them from what happens after access —how mobile phones and 
the Internet are actually used. This report uncovered that digital inequalities in Bangladesh are 
not well represented by neat divisions  between users and non -users. Getting people connected 
is only part of the battle. Once connected, people may continue to face barriers that hinder them 
from making greater use of digital technologies or to use specific digital services.  
There is no one -size fits all solution to tackling barriers to digital services . This report has 
shown that although there is significant overlap between b arriers in all digital services, each type 
of digital service also has its own unique barriers. Thus, it is important to also analyse barriers  for 
specific services rather than just connectivity. Doing so would improve the capacity of 
development actors to design for inclusion.  
Human  development become s more important  but may come before rather than after 
technology for t hose excluded . Report after report and study after study find that the same 
groups at risk of being left behind more generally (the poorest, women, the less educated, ethnic 
minorities, people with disabilities) have most to gain from the opportunities off ered by digital 
services but also are the least likely to be able to access and thus gain from them (Hernandez 
and Roberts 2018; ITU 2017; UNDP 2016; United Nations 2018; World Bank 2016, 2019) . The 
very nature of them being poor or marginalized makes people more likely to face the barriers 
uncovered in this report and remain excluded from the gains of an increasingly digital world. 
Thus, it becomes increasingly important that human development is prioritised over digital 
development rather than simply seeking to improve human development through digital services   
Building the agency of the most margi nalized will be required to ensure no one is left 
behind by the spread of digital services . Agency was found  to be a significant barrier to digital 
technology access and to digital service access, especially for women and girls. Along with 
human development, improving the reach of digital services and minimizing the risk that the most 
marginalized may be left be hind will require development actors to seek to empower those most 
at risk of being left behind alongside efforts to remove barriers to digital adoption.  
Areas of further research:  
This report did not find much data on disability and barriers to digital services. The r esearcher 
was unable to  find any literature that covered how disability affects barriers to digital services in 
Bangladesh. This could well be because the research was small scale (just 11  days). Further 
work is needed to uncover how people living with disabilities experience barriers to digital service 32 exclusion. Ideally, future work in this areas should unpack how people living with different types 
of disabilities may experience barriers to exclusion differently.   
The Rhoningya crisis has r elocated over 900,000 refugees in Bangaldesh since 2017.24 The 
barriers faced by refugees are likely to be different from the general population due to 
displacement as well as coming from contexts with different cultures and socio -economic 
structures and be ing more likely to live in remote camps. More research is needed to understand 
the unique barriers faced by Refugees.  
This report was unable to identify literature on how different groups of people (e.g. gender) 
experience barriers to online education diff erently beyond findings that are directly linked to how 
groups experience barriers to connectivity more generally. More work is needed in this area as 
the other sections of the report illustrate that different groups are likely to experience barriers 
different, especially by gender. This report was limited in scope and budget and it may be the 
case that the literature already exists but was not identified by the author.  
The barriers uncovered in this report are meant to be illustrative but not exhaustive. This report 
was limited to 11 days of secondary research and thus may have missed some key barriers. 
Primary ethnographic research would improve the chances of uncovering barriers further.  
Extrapolability  of findings  to different  contexts  
This report was written for Bangladesh, but many of the findings are likely to resonate with other 
Lower and Middle Income Countries. The findings from this report could therefore be used as a 
guide development actors in other places in uncover barriers to digital service s. However, 
barriers to access and their severity are likely to differ from countries to countries, and even 
within countries. When extrapolating these findings to other contexts, it is advisable to verify 
whether these barriers are also present in the giv en context as well as how prevalent or 
significant these barriers are in the given context as this is likely to differ from place to place. 
Moreover, development professionals working in Bangladesh are encouraged to further 
contextualize these findings sin ce there are likely to be differences within the country too (e.g. 
between urban and rural areas, between refugee camps and the rest of the country, and 
between different social groups). For example, this report uncovered that although lack of 
identificati on does not seem to be a significant barrier to obtaining a sim card in Bangladesh in 
general, this barrier seems to be felt more strongly by some users at high risk of being left 
behind. Non -mobile money users and adolescent girls (likely a lot of overlap  here) cite lacking 
necessary identification as a significant barrier for mobile money adoption.   
  
                                                   
24 https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/ download/69422  33 8. References  
After Access (2018a) The Inside Internet Story of Africa, Asia, and Latin America: Mobile and 
Internet Use in the Global South Has no “one -size-fits-all” approach . http://afteraccess.net/wp -
content/uploads/After -Access -Website -layout-r1.pdf  
After Access (2018b) Understanding the Gender Gap in the Global South (p. 47), DIRSI, 
LIRNEasia, Research ICT Africa , http://afteraccess.net/wp -content/uploads/2018 -After -Access -
Understanding -the-gender -gap-in-the-Global -South.pdf  
Agarwal, S. , Perry, H.B.,  Long, L. A. and Labrique, A.B. (2015). Evidence on feasibility and 
effective use of mHealth strategies by frontline h ealth workers in developing countries: 
systematic review . Tropical Medicine & International Health , 20(8), 1003 –1014, 
http://doi.org/10.1111/tmi.12525  
Agarwal, S., Rosenblum, L., Carras, M.,  Goal, N. and Labrique, A.B. (2016) Mobile Technology 
in Support o f Frontline Health Workers: A comprehensive overview of the landscape, knowledge 
gaps and future directions . Johns Hopkins Univer sity Global mHEalth 
Initiative. https://www.chwcentral.org/sites/default/files/Mobile%20Technology%20in%20Support
%20of%20Frontline%20Health%20Workers.pd f 
Ally, M. and Samaka, M. (2013). Open education resources and mobile technology to narrow the 
learning divide . The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 14.2, 
http://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v14i2.1530  
APC (2018). Mapping Resear ch in Gender and Digital Technology . 
https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/IDRC_Mapping_0323_0.pdf  
Apolitical (2017) . Bangladesh to roll out mobile payments nationwide by 201 8. 
https://apolitical.co/solution_article/bangladesh -roll-mobile -payments -nationwide -2018/  
Aranda -Jan, C.B. , Mohutsiwa -Dibe, N. and Loukanova, S. (2014) . Systematic review on what 
works, what does not work and why of implementation of mobile health (mHealth) projects in 
Africa .  BMC Public Health ,14(1), 188, http://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2458 -14-188 
Asabere, N. (2013) . Benefits and Challenges of Mobile Lear ning Implementation: Story of 
Developing Nations . International Journal of Computer Applications , 73(1), 23–27, 
http://doi.org/10.5120/12706 -9504  
Bloom, G., Berdou, E., Standing, H., Guo, Z. and Labrique, A. (2017). ICTs and the challenge of 
health system transition in l ow and middle -income countries.  Globalization and Health , 13(1), 56, 
http://doi.org/10.1186/s12992 -017-0276 -y 
Burns, M. (2019). 6 Myths of Online Learning Education Programs in International Development . 
https://www.ictworks.org/online -learning -education/#.XTXDXuhKiUk  
Chambers, R. (1983) . Rural development: putting the last first . Prentice Hall.  
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/178  
Cheney, C. (2017) . The road to real results for online learning in developing countries . 
https://www.devex.com/news/the -road-to-real-results -for-online -learning -in-developing -countries -
89884  34 Chukwuere, J.E. (2018) . The application of a culture -oriented e -learning system framework for 
developers : an approach for developing co untries . Journal of Gender, Information and 
Development in Africa (JGIDA) , 7(2), 9–37. https://journals.co.za/content/journal/10520/EJC -
10c9330ed3  
Croxson, H. and Rowntree, O. (201 7). Triggering mobile internet use among men and women in 
South Asia . https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -content/uplo ads/2017/11/GSMA -
Triggering -Mobile -Internet -Use_Web.pdf  
De Oliveira Neto, J.D., Pete, J., Cartmil, D. and Cartmill, T. (2017)  Oer Use In The Global South: 
A Baseline Survey Of Higher Education Instructors (Advance Online Publication) . 
http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.154559  
DFID (2018) DFID Digital Strategy 2018 to 2020: doing development in a digital world . 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dfid -digital -strategy -2018 -to-2020 -doing -
development -in-a-digital -world/dfid -digital -strategy -2018 -to-2020 -doing -development -in-a-digital -
world  
English First (2018). EF English Proficiency Index . 
https://www.ef.co.uk/__/~/media/centralefcom/epi/downloads/full -reports/v8/ef -epi-2018 -
english.pdf  
Evans, J. , Bhatt, S. and Sharma, R. (2018). The Path to Scale: Navigating Design, Policy, and 
Infrastructure . in E. Baulch, J. Watkins and A. Tariq (eds), mHealth Innovation in Asia: 
Grassroots Challenges and Practical Interventions (pp. 31 –48), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 
http://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-024-1251 -2_3 
Fadhi l, A. and Gabrielli, S. (2017). Addressing Challenges in Promoting Healthy Lifestyles: The 
Al-chatbot Approach , in Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on Per vasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (pp. 261 –265), New York, NY, USA: ACM, 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3154862.3154914  
Faith, B. (2018). Gender, Mobile, and Mobile Internet| Maintenance Affordances, Capabilities and 
Structural Inequalities: Mobile Phon e Use By Low -Income Women . Information Technologies & 
International Development , 14, https://itidjournal.org/index.php/itid/article/view/1556  
Farley, H. and Song, H. (2015) . Mobile Le arning in Southeast Asia: Opportunities and 
Challenges ,  in Y. Zhang (ed.), Handbook of Mobile Teaching and Learning (pp. 1 –14), Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, http://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642-41981 -2_2-1 
Feedback Mechanisms (2016). Using beneficiary feedback to improve development programmes: 
findings from a multi -country pilot . World Vision, INTRAC, Social Impact Lab, and CDA . 
https://www. intrac.org/wpcms/wp -content/uploads/2016/09/BFM -key-findings -summary.pdf  
Financial Inclusion Insights (2018a) . Bangladesh - Quicksights Report . 
http://www.finclusion.org/uploads/file/bangladesh -wave -5-quicksites_final.pdf  
Financial Inclusion Insights (20 18b). Bangladesh: Wave 5 Report . 
http://www.finclusio n.org/uploads/file/bangladesh -wave -5-report_final(1).pdf  
Fraser, D.E. and Martineau -Searle, L. (2018). Nature and Prevalence of Cyber Violence against 
Women and Girls . 35 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5c597613ed915d045f3778a2/VAWG_Helpdesk_R
eport_211_CyberVAWG.pdf  
Free, C., Phillips, G., Galli, L., Watson, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., Patel, V. and Haines, A. (2013) 
The Effectiveness of Mobile -Health Technology -Based Health Behaviour Change or Disease 
Management Interventions for Health Care Consumers: A Systematic Review.  PLOS Med , 10(1), 
e1001362. 
https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001362&type=printab
le 
Free, C., Phillips, G., Galli, L., Watson, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., Patel, V. and Haines, A. (2013) 
The Effecti veness of Mobile -Health Technologies to Improve Health Care Service Delivery 
Processes: A Systematic Review and Me ta-Analysis.  PLoS Medicine ,10(1), e1001363, 
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001363  
Frydrych, J. and Aschim, H. (2014) . Extending reach: M obile money in rural areas . 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -content/uploads/2014/10/2014_DI_Extending -
reach_Mobile -money -in-rural-areas.pdf  
Galpaya, H. and Amarasinghe, T. (2018) . After Access: ICT access and use in Bangladesh and 
the Global South . LIRNEasia . https://lirneasia.net/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/LIRNEasia -
AfterAccess -ICT-access -and-use-in-Bangladesh -and-the-Global -South.pdf  
Girl Effect (2018). Real girls, real lives, connected: A global study of access and usage of mobile, 
told through 3000 voices . 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b8d51837c9327d89d936a30/t/5bbe7bd6085229cf6860f5
82/1539210418583/GE_VO_Full_Report.pdf  
GSMA (2013) . Unlocking the Potential: Women and Mobile Financial Services in Emerging 
Markets . https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -content/uploads/2013/02/GSMA -
mWomen -Visa_Unlocking -the-Potential_Feb -2013.pdf  
GSMA and Frog (2017) . mHealt h Design Toolkit: Ten principles to launch, develop and scale 
mobile health services in emerging markets . https://www.gsma.c om/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/plugins/plugin_m4d_shortcodes//mhealth/GC_GSMA_FinalBooklet.pdf  
Gunawardena, C. (2014 ). Moocs: students in the global south are wary of a ‘sage on the stage . 
The Guardian . https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/19/cost -barrier -students -global -
south  
Hall, C.S. , Fottrell, E. , Wilkinson, S. and Byass, P. (2014). Assessing the impact of mHealth 
interventions in low - and middle -income countries – what has been shown to work?  Global 
Health Action , 7(1) 25606, http://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v7.25606  
Hashemi, M., Azizinezhad, M.,  Najafi, V. and Nesari, A.J. (2011). What is Mobile Learning? 
Challenges and Capabilities . 2nd World Conference on Psychology, Counselling and Guidance - 
2011 , 30,  2477 –2481, http://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.10.483  
Hernandez, K. (2019) . Achieving complex development goals along China’s Digital Silk Road . 
Brighton: Institute of Development Studies, 
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/14396  36 Hernandez, K. and Roberts, T. (2018) . Leaving No One Behind in a Digital World: An Extended 
Literature Review . 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5c178371ed915d0b8a31a404/Emerging_Issues_
LNOBDW_final.pdf  
Hillier, M. (2018) . Bridging the digital di vide with off -line e -learning,” Journal of Distance 
Education , 39(1), 110–121, http://doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2017.1418627  
Holloway, K., Rouse, R. and Cook, W. (2017). How Do Mobile Money Fee Structures Impact the 
Poor?  Innova tions for Poverty Action. https://www.cgap.org/blog/how -do-mobile -money -fee-
structures -impact -poor 
Hori, M., Ono, S.,  Yamaji, K. , Kobayashi, S. , Kita, T. and Yamada, T. (2016). A Suitable m -
Learni ng System Using e -Book for Developing Countries . in Proceedings of the 8th  International 
Conference on Computer Supported Education  (pp. 408 –415). Portugal: SCITEPRESS - Science 
and Technology Publications, Lda, http://doi.org/10.5220/0005880104080415  
Hussin, S., Manap, M.R., Amir, Z. and Krish, P. (2012) . Mobile Learning Readiness among 
Malaysian Students at Higher Learning Institutes . Journals of Asian Social Science , 8(12) , 
http://doi.org/10.5539/ass.v8n12p276  
International Telecommunication Union (2017) . ICT Facts and Figures 2017, International 
Telecommunication Union . https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -D/Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx  
Islam, M d.A. and Numan, Dr.S.Md. (2016). Can Mobile Learning Upgrade the Educational Status 
of Bangladesh: Challenges and Opportunities?  Presented at the Pan -Commonwealth Forum 8, 
Commonwealth of Learning (COL) and Open University Malaysia . 
http://oasis.col.org/bitstream/handle/11599/2679/PDF?sequence=4&isAllowed=y  
ITU (2017) . Fast-forward progress: Leveraging tech to achieve the global goals . 
https://www.itu.int/en/sustainable -world/Documents/Fast -
forward_progress_report_414709%20FINAL.pdf  
ITU (2018). Measuring the Information Society Report . https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -
D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2018/MISR -2018 -Vol-1-E.pdf  
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2018/MISR -2018 -Vol-2-E.pdf  
Khan, Md.S.,  Hasan, M. and Clement, C. (2012) Barriers to the Introduction of ICT into Education 
in Developing Count ries: The Example of Bangladesh.  Interna tional Journal of Instruction , 5(2), 
61-80. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED533790.pdf  
Khatun, F.,  Heywood, A.E. , Ray, P.K., Bhuiya, A. and Liaw, S. -T. (2016). Community readiness 
for ado pting mHealth in rural Banglad esh: A qualitative exploration.  International Journal of 
Medical Informatics , 93, 49–56, http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.05.010  
Kizilcec, R.F. , Saltarelli, A.J.,  Reich, J. and Cohen, G.L. (2017). Closing glo bal achievem ent gaps 
in MOOCs. Science , 355(6322 ), 251–252, http://doi.org/10.1126/science.aag2063  
Laurillard, D. (2014 ). Which problems could MOOCs solve, and how?  
https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20140708091436155  37 Lee, S.H., Nurmatov, U.B., Nwaru, B.I., Mukherjee, M., Grant, L. and Pagliari, C. (2016). 
Effectiveness of mHealth interventions for maternal, newborn and child health in low – and 
middle –income countries: Syst ematic review and meta –analysis.  Journal of Global Health , 6(1), 
010401, http://doi.org/10.7189/jogh.06.010401  
LIRNEasia (2018). AfterAccess: ICT access and use in Asia and the Global South . 
https://lirneasia.net/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/LIRNEasia -AfterAccess -Asia-Report.pdf  
Liyanagunawardena, T.,  Williams, S. and Adams, A. (2013) . The impact and reach of MOOCs: a 
developing countri es’ perspective.  ELearning Papers , 33, http://centaur.reading.ac.uk/32452/   
Liyanagunawardena,  T.R. and Aboshady, O.A. (2017). Massive open online courses: a resource 
for health ed ucation in developing co untries.  Global Health Promotion , 25(3), 74–76, 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1757975916680970  
McKinsey Global Institute (2015) . Digital America: A Tale of The Haves and Have -Mores . 
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McK insey/Industries/High%20Tech/Our%20Insights/Digital%
20America%20A%20tale%20of%20the%20haves%20and%20have%20mores/Digital%20Americ
a%20Full%20Report%20December%202015.ashx  
Mtebe, J.S. and Raisamo, R. (2014). Challenges and instructors’ intention to adopt and  use open 
educational resources in  higher education in Tanzania. The International Review of Research in 
Open and Distributed Learning , 15 (1) http://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v15i1.1687  
Northrop, D. (2018) . Mobile Learning in Low -Resource Countries . Interna tional Book Bank.  
http://internationalbookbank.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/Mobile -Learning -in-Low-Resource -
Countries -2.pdf  
Oluwat obi, S. and Olurinola, I. (2015) . Mobile Learning in Africa: S trategy for educating the poor.  
Presented at the International Conference on African Development Issues (CU -ICADI) , 2015: 
Infonnation and Cmmnunication Technology Track, 
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/32226356.pdf  
Pitaloka, D. (2018). The Use of Mobile Phones in Rural Javanese Villages: Knowledge 
Production and Information Exchange Among Poor Women with Diabetes.  in E. Baulch, J. 
Watk ins and A. Tariq (eds), mHealth Innovation in Asia: Grassroots Challenges and Practical 
Interventions  (pp. 49 –67). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.  http://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-024-
1251 -2_2 
Pouezevara, S. (2015). Revisiting the 'M' in M -Learning: Making t he most of Mobile 
Environments for Teaching and Learning.  Presented at the E -Learn 2015 , Kona, Hawaii, USA , 
October 19 -22, 2015. 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/cd02/476e147a2e5cd7c85c6573f64e159576a878.pdf?_ga=2.48
57652.621978786.1563809412 -1197112389.1563809412  
Rober ts, T. and Hernandez, K. (2019). Digital Access is not Binary: The 5’A’s of Techno logy 
Access in the Philippines. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries  
0.0: e12084, http://doi.org/10.1002/isd2.12084  
Sen, A. (1999) . Development as freedom . Oxford: Oxford University Press  38 Tariq, A. and Durrani, S. (2018) . One Size Does Not Fit All: The Importance of Contextually 
Sensitive mHealth Strategies for Frontline Female Health Workers.  in E. Baulch , J. Watkins and 
A. Tariq (eds).  mHealth Innovation in Asia: Grassroots Challenges and Practical Interventions  
(pp. 7 –29). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, http://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-024-1251 -2_2 
Toyama, K. (2015a) . Geek Heresy: Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of Technology . New 
York: PublicAffairs  
Toyama, K. (2015b) . Why Technology Alone Won’t Fix Schools . 
https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/06/why -technology -alone -wont -fix-
schools/394727/  
UNDP (2016) . Human Development Report 2016: Huma n Development for Everyone .  
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_human_development_report.pdf  
UNESCO (2018a). A Lifeline to learning: leveraging mobile techn ology to support education for 
refugees . Paris: UNESCO . https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000261278  
UNESCO (2018b). Managing tomorrow’s digital skills - what conclusions can we draw from 
international comparative indicators?  UNESCO Education Sector. 
http://repositorio.minedu.gob.pe/handle/MINEDU/5754  
United Nations (2018) . United Nations E -Government Survey 2018: Gear ing E -Government to 
support transformation towards sustainabile and resilient societies . 
https://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/E -Government%20Survey%20 2018_FINAL.pdf  
Unwin, T. (2017) . ICTs Sustainability and Development: Critical Elements.  in A.R. Sharafat and 
W. Lehr (eds).  ICT-centric economic growth, innovation and job creation 2017 . Geneva, 
Switzerland: ITU . 
Waldman, L. , Ahmed, T. , Scott, N , Akter, S., Stand ing, H. and Rasheed, S. (2018). We have the 
internet in our hands: Bangladeshi college students’ use of ICTs for health information. 
Globalization and Health , 14(1), 31, http://doi.org/10.1186/s12992 -018-0349 -6 
We are Social (2018). Digital 2018 - Bangladesh .  
https://www.slideshare.net/DataReportal/digital -2018 -bangladesh -january -2018  
West, M., Chew, H.E. and UNESCO (2014). Reading in the mobile e ra: a study of mobile reading 
in developing countries . https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000227436  
World Bank (2016) . World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends . Washington DC:  The 
World Bank.  https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/978 -1-4648 -0671 -1 
World Bank (Ed.) (2019) . The changing nature of work. Washington, DC, USA: World Bank 
Group . http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/816281518818814423/2019 -WDR -Report.pdf  
  
  39 Suggested citation  
Hernandez, K.  (2019). Barriers to Digital Services  Adoption in Bangladesh . K4D Helpdesk Report  
573. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.  
 
About this report  
This report is based on eleven  days of desk -based research. The K4D research he lpdesk provides rapid 
syntheses of a selection of recent rel evant literature and international expert thinking in response to specific 
questions  relating to international development. For any enquiries, contact helpdesk @k4d.info . 
K4D services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations  working in international development, led by 
the Institute of Development Studies (IDS), with Education Development Trust, Itad , University of Leeds Nuffield 
Centre for International Health and Development, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), Un iversity of 
Birmingham International Development Department (IDD) and the University of Manchester Humanitarian and 
Conflict Response Institute (HCRI).  
This report was prepared for the UK Government’s Department for International 
Development (DFID) and its  partners in support of pro -poor programmes. It is licensed for 
non-commercial purposes only. K4D cannot be held responsible for errors or any 
consequences arising from the use of information contained in this report. Any views and 
opinions expressed do no t necessarily reflect those of DFID, K4D or any other contributing 
organisation. © DFID - Crown copyright 201 9. 
