COMPETITION IN NETWORK INDUSTRIES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE RWANDAN MOBILE PHONE NETWORK
DANIEL BJÖRKEGREN∗
This paper analyzes the potential for competition policy to aﬀect welfare and in-
vestment in a network industry. When a network is split between competitors, each
internalizes less network eﬀects, but may still invest to steal customers. I structurally
estimate the utility of adopting a mobile phone from subsequent usage, using transac-
tion data from nearly the entire Rwandan network. I simulate the equilibrium choices
of consumers and network operators. Adding a competitor earlier could have reduced
prices and increased incentives to invest in rural towers, increasing welfare by the
equivalent of 1% of GDP.
JEL Classification Codes : O33, L96, O180, L51
Keywords : network eﬀects, infrastructure, information technology
∗Brown University. E-mail: dan@bjorkegren.com, Web: http://dan.bjorkegren.com
Revision December 20, 2020.
Thank you to Nathan Eagle for initial access to data. Thank you also to Susan Athey, Michael
Kremer, Greg Lewis, Ariel Pakes, Greg Rosston, and Jesse Shapiro for helpful conversations. In
Rwanda, I thank the staﬀ of my telecom partner, RURA, NISR, and PSF for helpful conversations
and access to data. Ella Ty Karambizi, Shunsuke Tsuda and Aaron Weisbrod provided excellent
researchassistance. ThankyouforfeedbackfromaudiencesattheBerkeley-StanfordIOFest, Boston
College, FCC, FTC, IIOC, Jinan University Workshop on Firms in Emerging Economies, Microsoft
Research, NBER IO, NBER Development, NBER Digitization, NSF Conference on Network Science
in Economics, PacDev, Princeton, RAND Corporation, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UCSD, University
College London, University of Washington, World Bank ABCA, and Yale. This work was supported
by Brown University SSRI and the NET Institute (http://www.netinst.org). The author gratefully
acknowledgesthesupportoftheW.GlennCampbellandRitaRicardo-CampbellNationalFellowship
at Stanford University and Microsoft Research during this project.
12
1.Introduction
How should societies manage dominant networks? Governments commonly inter-
vene to spur competition, in the hope that consumer choice will discipline ﬁrms.
However, competition also splits consumers across networks. As a result, ﬁrms inter-
nalize less network eﬀects. That could lower incentives to invest, unless it is oﬀset by
a suﬃcient motive to steal customers from competitors.
Despite extensive theory, there is little empirical work to guide policy for classical
network goods, whose users value links with other users (such as communication, pay-
ment, or social networks).1This paper focuses on emerging economies, where telecom
networks have begun to play an outsized role. Although voice calls still account for
the majority of revenues, in these societies mobile phone operators are emerging as
gatekeepers to information services, the internet, and, increasingly, ﬁnancial transac-
tions.2The details of how to manage competition have been ‘a main bottleneck’ to
the sector’s development (World Bank, 2004), and regulators have little guidance on
when to tilt favor, allow consolidation (Moody’s, 2015), or split ﬁrms (Reuters, 2017).
ThispaperevaluatestheeﬀectsofcompetitiononinvestmentandwelfareinRwanda’s
mobile phone network, using 5.3 billion transaction records from an incumbent op-
erator that held over 88% of the market. I extend the network demand system of
Björkegren (2019) to allow for competition, and model a tractable supply side to com-
pute equilibria between ﬁrms and 1.5 million networked consumers. I evaluate how
introducing competition earlier could aﬀect prices, investment, and welfare. I ﬁnd
that adding a competitor could have increased incentives to invest, and increased
1See Katz and Shapiro (1994) and Farrell and Klemperer (2007) for review articles. The theory on
competition in developed country landline networks (Armstrong, 1998; Laﬀont et al., 1998; Laﬀont
and Tirole, 2001) can be inconclusive (Vogelsang, 2013), and with few exceptions (e.g., Valletti and
Cambini, 2005) omits factors important for growing networks such as investment and network eﬀects
in adoption.
2Voice accounts for 60% of the my telecom partner’s parent’s African revenue in 2017 (including two
small operations outside of Africa).3
welfare by the equivalent of 1% of GDP. This paper represents the ﬁrst empirical
analysis of competing classical network goods using micro data.
Like most African countries, Rwanda initially licensed a monopoly mobile phone
operator and gradually allowed entry (Williams et al., 2011). Each ﬁrm was required
to interoperate so consumers could call customers of other networks, but each oﬀered
coverage exclusively to its own customers. I study a period during which the reg-
ulator allowed entry of a second ﬁrm, which ended up being poorly run and never
captured much market share. Despite this entrant’s weaknesses, within 4.5 years the
incumbent lowered real calling prices by 76% and nearly quadrupled the number of
towers, increasing coverage from 60% to a nearly complete 95% of land area. My data
from the incumbent cover nearly the entire network of mobile phones at the time, and
nearly every call over those 4.5 years.
Immediately after this period, the regulator granted an additional license to a
well managed competitor, which built coverage in lucrative urban markets, charged
lower prices, and captured market share. Could the government have done better by
granting this additional competitor a license at the beginning of the period?
I answer these questions using an empirical approach that proceeds in three steps.
First, the government chooses whether to grant a license to an additional com-
petitor, and if so, the interconnection rate that each ﬁrm pays the other when its
subscribers call in to their network.
Second, ﬁrms choose from a menu of strategies. The entrant builds urban towers
and selects a path of calling prices, anticipating the choices of the incumbent. Then,
the incumbent selects calling prices and whether to build the nearly complete set of
towers it actually built, or scale back low population rural towers. I use engineering
cost data collected under mandate by the regulator. I require that ﬁrms charge users
the same rate for on- and oﬀ-network calls, proportional to the incumbent’s baseline
price path. Because these terms could have been implemented by the regulator, my4
results represent a lower bound of the potential welfare beneﬁts of competition under
more ﬂexible policies.
Third, I model the utility of adopting and using a phone. Almost all phones in
Rwanda were basic, prepaid mobile phones.3I infer the value of each voice connection
fromsubsequentinteractionacrossthatconnection, usingthemethodandestimatesof
Björkegren (2019). This approach bypasses most of the simultaneity issues that result
from inferring the value of links from correlations in adoption.4Calls are billed by the
second, so a subscriber must value a connection at least as much as the cost of calls
placed across it.5Variation in prices and coverage identiﬁes the underlying demand
curve for communication across each link. Consumers are forward looking, choosing
when to adopt by weighing the increasing stream of utility from communicating with
thenetworkagainstthedecliningcostofhandsets. IextendBjörkegren(2019)toallow
consumers to select and switch between operators. I survey Rwandan consumers to
estimate switching costs and idiosyncratic preferences with hypothetical questions.
Equilibria are computed using an iterated best response algorithm. Firms com-
mit to price and rollout plans, then consumers publicly announce adoption dates,
operator choices, and usage. I index the multiple equilibria in demand by exploiting
supermodularity (similar to Jia (2008) and Björkegren (2019)); ﬁrms anticipate the
index of the equilibrium that consumers will play.
In resulting equilibria, building a tower increases the adoption and usage of indi-
viduals who call from that location, which increases the adoption of those they are
connected to, which increases the adoption of others with no connections to that lo-
cation, and so on. A monopolist will internalize these demand spillovers within the
3In the period I study mobile money did not exist. As of this writing, only 9% of mobile phones in
Rwanda are smartphones (ResearchICTAfrica, 2017).
4One individual may adopt after a contact adopts because the contact provides network beneﬁts, or
because connected individuals share similar traits or are exposed to similar environments.
5In the ﬁrst 14 months of the data, calls are billed by the ﬁrst minute and every following 30 seconds.5
entire network. Under competition, interoperability causes beneﬁts to spill over into
competing networks, but each ﬁrm internalizes only spillovers within its own network.
I simulate the industry through December 2008, and ﬁnd:
Adding a competitor could have lowered prices by 30-50% and increased incentives
to invest in rural towers, under an interconnection rate of $0:11/minute. This policy
would have increased the net welfare provided by the mobile phone system by up
to 60%, an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP or 3-5% of the oﬃcial development
aid received by the country over this timespan. This suggests that the industrial
organization of emerging networks can have profound welfare implications.
I ﬁnd that tower investments induce limited spillovers across networks: when the
network is split, the incumbent still internalizes 95-99% of incremental proﬁts from
building rural towers (holding ﬁxed operator choices). But investing attracts con-
sumers from the other operator, so overall, the incumbent can face a higher return
from investment when it faces an additional competitor. The business stealing ef-
fect accounts for 80-88% of the incumbent’s proﬁt from the investment, coming from
semiurban consumers who partially value rural coverage.
Overall outcomes depend on the competition policy used. While the return on
investment (ROI) can be higher under competition, it declines as the networks are
made more compatible through lower interconnection fees. But building the rural
towers is still proﬁtable under all interconnection fees. Lower interconnection fees
also lead to lower prices and higher welfare. A policy to reduce switching costs
(number portability) increases the level of competition. Delaying entry results in
smaller eﬀects during this time period.
A limitation to my approach is that the network is illuminated by usage, so individ-
uals who do not adopt under baseline conditions are omitted. I model the behavior
of nodes in this ‘dark’ portion of the network, and the results I report are for shorter
time horizons before these nodes would have adopted.6
Altogether, this paper introduces an approach that could be applied by a regulator
planning policy scenarios for a dominant monopoly network. I combine data from a
dominant network with models of ﬁrm and consumer behavior, to anticipate how the
industry would evolve under competition. The key to this exercise is ensuring those
models are realistic. Some of the information I use to discipline these models would
be available to such a regulator: choices made under the incumbent, and data from
markets that were competitive at the time. However, I also beneﬁt from observing
Rwanda after the market became competitive. Altogether, this approach can be used
to evaluate the eﬀect of a wide class of policies; in addition to what I consider here:
breaking up the incumbent, requiring networks to interconnect under heterogeneous
rates, directlyregulatingcoverageorthepriceofcalls, andchangingtaxesonhandsets
and airtime.
Related Literature. This paper builds on the classical network demand system es-
timated in Björkegren (2019), which has parallels to Ryan and Tucker (2012)’s model
of videoconferencing adoption. Most empirical work on classical network goods sim-
ply measures the extent of network eﬀects; see for example Saloner and Shepard
(1995), Goolsbee and Klenow (2002), and Tucker (2008). Common demand system
simpliﬁcations can provide misleading estimates in these industries. I ﬁnd that rev-
enue estimates can be biased ranging from 52% too small to 86% too large in demand
systems that do not model the full structure of the network (by omitting interde-
pendence in consumer decisions, modeling network beneﬁts in aggregate, or treating
links as random draws).
There is a much larger literature on goods with indirectnetwork eﬀects, for which
consumers beneﬁt from additional users not because they value links with those users,
but because popular platforms are better served by sellers. These include platforms
and video formats (Ohashi, 2003; Gowrisankaran et al., 2010). Lee (2013) considers7
software compatibility (exclusivity) arrangements in video game platforms using a
dynamic model of demand that holds ﬁxed prices and investments. In a natural
experiment, Farronato et al. (2020) ﬁnd that service and usage outcomes change
little when two competing pet sitting platforms merge.
Much of the dynamic oligopoly literature focuses on settings with static demand
(Ericson and Pakes, 1995). Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) model dynamic de-
mandfordurables, withﬁrmsthatmakeper-periodpricingdecisions. Istudydynamic
provision of service for a durable that has a ﬂow utility that changes depending on
whether contacts have adopted, calling prices, and changing spatial coverage.6Since
I can use regulator cost data, I skip estimating costs from dynamic decisions (Bajari
et al., 2007; Pakes et al., 2008).
Goettler and Gordon (2011) and Igami (2017) together suggest the eﬀect of com-
petition on innovation can vary based on industry primitives. My setting diﬀers in
that operators face network eﬀects, and earn revenue from ongoing service fees so do
not compete with previous vintages of product.
Myapproachcomplementscomparisonsbetweencountriesthatsetdiﬀerenttelecom
policies. Faccio and Zingales (2017) and Genakos et al. (2018) ﬁnd that increases in
a telecom competition index are associated with price reductions, and Grajek and
Röller (2012) ﬁnd that a higher index of access to incumbents’ infrastructure reduces
investment in EU ﬁxed line networks.7
6The model has both classical network eﬀects in adoption (my utility depends on whether my
particular contacts adopt) as well as indirect network eﬀects in coverage (if more customers adopt,
even if I have no desire to talk with them, my operator may ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to build towers).
7For reviews see Cambini and Jiang (2009) and Manganelli and Nicita (2020).8
Figure 1. Mobile Telecom Competition in sub-Saharan Africa
Percent of countries with diﬀerent industry structures. Source: Williams et al. (2011).
2.Context
Developingcountryphonesystems. Developingcountryregulatorstypicallystarted
mobile phone industries by granting temporary monopolies, and then gradually li-
censed additional competitors (see Figure 1). Licenses commonly require ﬁrms to
submit business plans, describing tower investments and pricing strategies (World
Bank, 2013), and required networks to be interoperable so that users could call across
networks, with explicit terms of interconnection.8(Left to the market, incumbents
typically demand prohibitively high fees for interconnection; but even when network
sizes are balanced, ﬁrms can use interconnection rates as an instrument of collusion
(Armstrong, 1998; Laﬀont et al., 1998).) It is common for regulators to telegraph
future policy by announcing entry dates or glide paths for interconnection, though
thereareoccasionalsurprises. Laterentrantstypicallychargedlowerpricesandserved
densely populated areas, which are more lucrative.
8Licenses include rights to use speciﬁc bands of electromagnetic spectrum. Availability of spectrum
was not a major constraint for regulators in poorer countries in this era, as there were few competing
uses. See Supplemental Appendix S4.1.9
Table 1. Mobile Telecommunications in sub-Saharan Africa
Mean SD
Number of operators 3.27 1.48
...top market share 0.58 0.19
...second highest market share 0.32 0.09
Market concentration (HHI) 0.49 0.21
Interconnection charges are regulated 97%
...based on costs (LRIC or FDC) 71%
...based on benchmarks 43%
Industry statistics from 2015 or latest year available, source: regulator reports and news articles.
Regulation statistics from 2015, for all SSA countries with available regulatory data (ranges from
21 to 41 countries depending on question), source: ITU.
However, there is little consensus on the optimal ground rules for competition.
Table 1 shows that sub-Saharan Africa has a wide diversity in levels of competition,
and how interconnection rates are set.9
Rwanda. In the aftermath of the genocide and civil war, the Rwandan government
in 1998 granted a temporary exclusive license to a multinational operator to build and
run a mobile phone system (Operator A). Rwanda’s licenses allow an operator to set
consumer prices at its discretion, but require specifying towers to be constructed over
a 5 year horizon, updated upon renewal.10Most tower investments were driven by
market incentives, but the operator was required to cover a handful of rural priority
areas (amounting to 11% of rural towers active by 2009; Björkegren (2019)).
In 2003, the government announced it would provide a license to a second mobile
operator, which entered in 2005 (Operator B). The second operator turned out to be
poorly run and have quality issues. It was part of the former state landline company,
but was purchased by an American satellite entrepreneur who was disconnected from
9Additionally, most interconnection models are designed for mature developed country networks,
and so do not account for network eﬀects in adoption.
10These are enforced: when Operator B failed to comply with its rollout plan, it was ﬁned and its
license was ultimately revoked.10
realities on the ground (WSJ, 2006; IGIHE.com, 2011). After several changes in
ownership, it reached a maximum of 20% market share for a brief period after the
end of my data. In 2011, its license was revoked for failure to meet obligations.11
In 2008 the Rwandan regulator asked for bids and rollout plans for a third license.
It granted the license to a third multinational operator (Operator C), which entered
at the end of 2009, and required the previous operators to renew their licenses. A
consultant recommended lowering interconnection rates based on cost data (PwC,
2011).
In 2011, the assets and license of Operator B were absorbed into Operator D. In
2018, Operator C and D merged, bringing the market back to a duopoly.
See Figure 2 for the evolution of handset prices, accounts, calling prices, and cov-
erage. This paper uses data from the period 2005-2009. Because the incumbent
expected a ﬁrm to enter in 2005, starting conditions include dynamic eﬀects of an-
ticipating a new entrant. The calling price plot shows the baseline calling price, and
foreshadows a counterfactual where Operator C is granted a license in 2005 at an
interconnection rate of $0.11 per minute.
Consumerchoice. Table2showsstatisticsonphoneadoptionandusageinRwanda
and several sub-Saharan African countries. Handsets are standard, imported models,
with prices that track global trends. Most are purchased at retail price.12During
this period, phones were used primarily for voice calls, and almost all phone plans are
prepaid, withnomonthlyfeebutamarginalchargepersecond. Mobilemoneydidnot
exist at this point, and I do not explicitly model utility from text messages, missed
11WSJ (2006) reports that the operator “had no customer-service department and 12 employees
whose sole job was to play on the company soccer team.” The Registrar General, Louise Kanyonga
said, “The company was mismanaged and their liabilities far outweigh their assets... This has been
a real learning experience for our government. We need to ask how this happened.”
12In Rwanda most are purchased from independent sellers: operator handset sales records account
for only 10% of total handsets activated during the period of my data.11
Figure 2. Development of Telecommunications in Rwanda
(a) Handset Price (real, quality adjusted index)
$0$50$100$150
20042005200620072008200920102011201220132014Handset Price
(b) Accounts
● ● ● ● 01,000,0002,000,0003,000,0004,000,000
20042005200620072008200920102011201220132014Subscribers●●●●● ABCDLandline
(c) Calling Price, On Network (30 second, nominal)
$0.00$0.10$0.20
20042005200620072008200920102011201220132014Price (30 sec peak)Baseline Counterfactual
(d) Coverage (geographic)
0%25%50%75%100%
20042005200620072008200920102011201220132014Coverage
Handset prices reported during the years I have data on prices and quantities. I report baseline
calling prices and the prices from a counterfactual where Operator C enters in 2005 with an
interconnection rate of $0.11 per minute. Sources: archived operator websites and regulator
reports.12
Table 2. Mobile Phone Usage among Owners in sub-Saharan Africa
2007-8 2010-11
Rwanda SSA** Rwanda SSA*
Received phone with a contract 0% 3% 3% 11%
Use phone for
Voice calls 95% 98% 100% 99%
Music or radio 6% 14% 35% 46%
Taking photos or videos 5% 15% 24% 39%
Email 2% 3% 13% 14%
Sending or receiving money - - 18% 18%
Browsing Internet - - 15% 17%
Facebook or other social network - - 14% 16%
Apps (downloaded) - - 6% 15%
Source: RIA household surveys 2007-2008 and 2010-2011. *: Representative samples of mobile
phone owners in Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda,
South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda; **: also Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire,
Senegal, and Zambia. A dash indicates that question was not asked in that survey round.
calls, international calls, and calls from payphones.13Any value these omissions
provide is captured in a residual in the adoption decision.
3.Data
This project uses several data sources:14
Call detail records: As a side eﬀect of providing service, mobile phone operators
record data about each transaction, called Call Detail Records (CDRs). This project
uses 4.5 years of anonymous call records from Operator A, which held above 88%
of the market during this period. This data includes nearly every call between the
operator’s mobile phone subscribers, numbering approximately 400,000 in January
2005 and growing to 1.5 million in May 2009. It does not include the small number
of calls to individuals who subscribed to Operator B. For each transaction, the data
reports: anonymous identiﬁers for sender and receiver, corresponding to the phone
13See Supplemental Appendix S1 for more details.
14For more information see Supplemental Appendix S1-S3.13
number and handset, time stamps, the location of the cell towers used, and call
duration.15I aggregate durations to the monthly level.
Operator costs: The Rwandan regulator collects cost data from operators in
order to ensure interconnection rates are ‘derived from relevant costs’ (RURA, 2009).
I use long run incremental costs from a consultant study (PwC, 2011), and the cost
of operating towers from a public study commissioned to set the regulated prices of
infrastructure sharing (RURA, 2011).
Coverage: A rollout plan, z=f(tz;xz;yz)g, is deﬁned by tower build dates and
geographical coordinates. z(r)represents the rollout that builds urban towers but
only the proportion rof rural towers covering the highest populations, so that z(100%)
represents the baseline rollout.16I create coverage maps by computing the areas
within line of sight of the towers operational in each month, a method suggested by
the operator’s network engineer. Elevation maps are derived from satellite imagery
recorded by NASA (Jarvis et al., 2008; Farr et al., 2007).
Individual locations and coverage: it(z)2[0;1]represents the coverage avail-
ableatindividual i’smostusedlocationsunderrolloutplan z, computedinBjörkegren
(2019) using a method analogous to triangulation.
Handset prices: I create a monthly handset price index phandset
tbased on 160
popular models in Rwanda, adjusting for quality and weighting each model by the
quantity activated on the network.
Consumer survey: To estimate the costs of switching, and idiosyncratic pref-
erences for the entrant, I posed hypothetical incremental switching exercises to 89
mobile phone owners in Rwanda in the summer of 2017.
15Data are missing for May 2005, February 2009, and part of March 2009.
16Rankings determined based on population within a 10 km radius.14
4.Model
The incumbent arrives in month t= 0(January 2005) with an initial set of sub-
scribers and towers. The government announces policy, each ﬁrm decides paths of
callingpricesandcoverage, andeachconsumerdecideswhichmonthtoadoptaphone,
with what operator, and how much to call each contact. I assess results under diﬀer-
ent time horizons ~T. I consider Rwanda’s handset market as perfectly competitive,
with exogenous prices unaﬀected by the market for service.
4.1.Government. In montht= 0, the government announces its policy through
~T: either it will not license an additional competitor (‘baseline’), or will additionally
license Operator C (‘competition’) with interconnection fee f, a measure of compat-
ibility. Counterfactuals will consider granting the license in t= 0, or after a delay so
consumers can select the new operator starting in t= 42(July 2008).
The government earns revenue from taxes on adoption ( handset
it) and usage ( usage
it);
these rates are held ﬁxed and their path is announced in advance.17I do not take a
stand on whether the government maximizes tax revenue, welfare, or another objec-
tive.
17The government earns tax revenue:
R~T
G(p;z;x;a) =X
i2STandxi~T2
4xihandset
ixiphandset
xi+~TX
txi0
@tusage
itX
j2Gi\Stpait
tEdij(pt;t;a)1
A3
5
whereStis the set of individuals with phones in month t,xirepresentsi’s adoption date, aiti’s
operator,pait
tis the calling price, Girepresents the contacts of i, and Edij(:::)represents the
expected number of seconds of calls from itoj, and arepresents the matrix of ﬁrm choices for each
individual and month.15
4.2.Firms.The entrant ( F= 1), and then incumbent ( F= 0) select a tower rollout
plan zFand a path of calling prices pF= (pF
t)t, earning proﬁts through ~T:18
~T
F(p;z;x;a;f) =R~T
F(p;z;x;a;f) C~T
F(p;z;x;a)
where p= [p0;p1],z= [z0;z1],x= [xi]the vector of adoption dates, and a= [ait]
is the matrix of operator choices for each individual and month.
The entrant builds only urban towers ( z1=z(0%)), following its parent company’s
articulated strategy in Africa (and later initial plan in Rwanda).19The incumbent
builds urban towers, and also selects the proportion of rural towers rto build, where
towers are ranked by population covered ( z0=fz(100%);z(50%)g; see Figure 320).
Firms may select calling prices as a multiple of the incumbent’s baseline price path:
pF2 pbase,givenachoicefromthegrid  2f0:1;0:2;0:3;0:4;0:5;0:6;0:7;0:8;0:9;1g.
Firms must charge subscribers the same price for calls placed within the same net-
work (on-net) and to the other network (oﬀ-net), an assumption that can be thought
of as a rule imposed by the regulator.21
18This order of play is selected to more closely match what happened in Rwanda, where the entrant
submitted its bid for the new phase of competition ﬁrst.
19Operator C’s global Annual Report in 2010 said: ‘There is scope for further coverage growth in our
African markets, but urban centers currently represent the signiﬁcant majority of the addressable
population.’
20The Supplemental Appendix considers a wider set of options.
21While a rule to restrict oﬀ-net prices was not common in African markets at this time, it was
proposed for Rwanda (Argent and Pogorelsky, 2011), and has been used in several countries to
discipline competition (including Kenya, Singapore, Colombia, Turkey, Slovenia, and Portugal: see
TMG, 2011). If instead operators charge diﬀerent prices for on- and oﬀ-net calls, the game admits
too many equilibria to be useful, because all cliques of individuals may tip into one network or the
other.16
Figure 3. Rollout Plans
Incumbent Plan z02 Entrant Plan z1=
z(100%) z(50%) z(0%)
All towers Do not build half of rural towers
covering lowest populationOnly urban towers2005
 2009
Rural
100,000 200,000 300,000 400,0000.02.55.07.510.0
Population (within 10 km)Towers
Rural
100,000 200,000 300,000 400,0000.02.55.07.510.0
Population (within 10 km)Towers
Rural
100,000 200,000 300,000 400,0000.02.55.07.510.0
Population (within 10 km)Towers
Shows the coverage plans that operators may choose from. Starting from the its set of towers in
2005, the incumbent may build all towers ( z(100%)) or skip the half of rural towers covering the
lowest population ( z(50%)). The entrant may build urban towers ( z(0%)). Coverage shaded; points
denote cities. National parks shaded in light green; Lake Kivu shaded in light blue.17
FirmFearns net revenue from the calls of its own subscribers, and from intercon-
nection payments: ﬁrms pay each other ffor each second their subscribers call in to
the other network:
R~T
F(p;z;x;a;f) =X
i2ST~TX
txitX
j2Gi\StEdij(pt;t(z);a)2
64Subscribersz}|{
(1 usage
it )pF
t1fait=Fg+
fh
1fait6=F\ajt=Fg 1fait=F\ajt6=Fgi
| {z }
Interconnection3
75
whereStis the set of individuals with phones in month t,Girepresents the contacts
ofi,Edij(:::)represents the expected seconds that individual icallsj.22
FirmFincurs costs:
C~T
F(p;z;x;a) =KruralX
z2zF;zis oﬀ grid~TX
txtowerzt+~TX
tminfxtower
zFgtfcF
+X
i2ST~TX
txitX
j2Gi\StEdij(pt;t(z);a)(icout
Li;onnetij1fait=Fg+icin
Lj;onnetij1fajt=Fg)
Firms act as though they rent rural towers, incurring an annualized cost of Krural
for owning and operation. Operator Fincurs ﬁxed cost fcFeach month. icdirection
Li;onnetij
is the incremental cost of sending or receiving an additional second for direction2
fin;outg. Costs vary by whether the two parties are on the same network, and
between subscriber primary location ( Li2furban;ruralg).23
4.3.Consumers. Given operator choices, each consumer decides when to adopt a
phone (xi), and each month which operator to use ( ait2 f0;1g) and how many
seconds to call each contact ( dijt0).24
22STrepresents the set of individuals who adopted phones in the baseline scenario by the end of the
data (T).
23A tower is considered urban if it covers Kigali or one of Rwanda’s 5 largest towns; a subscriber is
considered urban if his most used tower is urban.
24Forsimplicity, consumersmayonlyuseoneoperatoreachmonth(singlehoming). Inmarketswhere
diﬀerent operators have low on-net prices and high oﬀ-net prices, consumers may hold accounts with18
I extend the network demand system from Björkegren (2019) to allow individuals
to choose between operators. The primary unit of observation is an account, which
corresponds to a phone number. For ease of exposition I refer to accounts as individu-
als or nodes.25I observe the communication graph G0
T, where a directed link ij2G0
T
indicates that ihas calledjby periodTwhile both subscribed to the incumbent.26
DeﬁneGi=fjjij2G0
Tgasi’s set of contacts, and StNas the set of individuals
with phones in month t. (See Discussion section for more on the network deﬁnition.)
Calling decision. Each period t, individual idraws a communication shock ijtiid
Fijrepresenting a desire to call each contact j2Gi\Stthat subscribes to either
operator. These shock distributions, fFijgij2GT, encode the intensities of the links
of the communication graph. In each period that ihas a phone, he chooses a total
durationdijt0for that month, earning utility:
(1) uijt= max
dijt01
costvij(dijt;ijt) cijtdijt
wherev(d;)is the beneﬁt of making calls of total duration of d,cijtthe per-second
cost, andcosta coeﬃcient on cost (which converts between utils and money).
I model the beneﬁt of making calls as:
(2) vij(d;) =d 1
d
+d
multiple operators to connect with contacts on diﬀerent networks. Given that oﬀ-network pricing is
restricted, there is less reason for consumers to hold multiple accounts.
25I assume that each account is associated with a unitary entity such as an individual, ﬁrm, or
household; see Supplemental Appendix S1 and Björkegren (2019).
26G0
Tis a subgraph of Gthe full communication graph of Rwanda (a directed social network), with
Nnodes representing all individuals in the country. A directed link ij2Gindicates that iwould
have a potential desire to call jvia phone. I assume that links are ﬁxed. Let StNbe the set of
individuals with phones in month t. I observe only individuals who adopt the incumbent by the end
of my data T, the setS0
TN. This will miss any links between subscribers where there is a latent
desire to communicate but no call has been placed by T(G0
TG0
T).19
for > 0, where the ﬁrst term is a linear beneﬁt;  > 1controls how quickly
marginal returns decline, and 0controls how the intercept of marginal utility
varies with the shock, and thus the fraction of months for which no call is placed.
The marginal cost of placing a call is aﬀected by the choice of operator:
cijt=pait
t+coverageait
itajt
jt
The second term represents the hassle cost when the caller or receiver have imper-
fect coverage, given by ait
it=it(zait).
The beneﬁt of an additional second of duration across a link is decreasing, so iwill
calljuntil the marginal beneﬁt equals the marginal cost, at duration:
(3) d(;pt;t;a) =
 
1 cost(pait
t+coverageait
itajt
jt)
 1
 1
which increases with the desire to communicate ( ) and decreases with cost. If
the desire to communicate is not strong enough, idoes not call: dijt= 0when
ijtijt:=
1 cost(pait
t+coverageait
itajt
jt).
Then, calls from itojin periodthave expected duration:
(4) Edij(pt;t;a) =Z1
ijtd(;pt;t;a)dFij()
and provide expected utility:
(5)
Euij(pt;t;a) =Z1
ijt
d(;pt;t;a)1
cost
1 

 pait
t coverageait
itajt
jt
 1
costd(;pt;t;a)

dFij()
Altogether, each month iuses operator ait, he receives actual expected utility from
each contact who has also adopted:
(6) Euit(pt;t;xGi;a) =X
j2GiandxjtEuij(pt;t;a) s1fait6=ait 1g20
wherexjrepresentsj’s adoption time and sthe cost of switching operators.27
However, at the point of adoption, ianticipates that having a phone in month twill
provide utility:
E^uit(pt;t;xGi;a) =Euit(pt;t;xGi;a) +ait
i(1 )
whereanindividual’stype (0
i;1
i)representsheterogeneityintheanticipatedutility
of using a phone on each operator that is unobserved to the econometrician. Types
need not be mean zero, but each individual’s type is constant over time and across
counterfactuals. Each month that idoes not have a phone he receives utility zero.
Adoption decision. Each individual iadopts at the ﬁrst suﬃciently attractive date,
based on the actual paths of contact adoptions ( xGi), call prices ( px), and coverage
(x). He knows the current handset price ( phandset
t, inclusive of any tax), and has
beliefs about future handset prices and contact operator choices.
Adoption proceeds in two steps:
First, consumer idecides when to purchase a handset, expecting that adopting at
timexwith operator sequence aiwill yield utility:
(7) EtUx;ai
i(p;;xGi;^aGi) =x"1X
sxs xE^uis(ps;s;xGi;[ai;^aGi]) Etphandset
x#
under deterministic beliefs that in period x>t, the handset price will be Etphandset
x,
and that each contact jwill use operator ^aj, which will be deﬁned later. iadopts in
the ﬁrst month xiwhere he expects adopting immediately to be more attractive than
waiting:
(8) minxis:t:
max
aiExiUxi;ai
i(p;;xGi;^aGi)max
s>xi;~ aiExiUs;~ ai
i(p;;xGi;^aGi)
27In this model, consumers receive utility from the calls they place (which they pay for). Björkegren
(2019) also considers the possibility that consumers also earn corresponding utility from the calls
they receive (which are free), but ﬁnds these double count utility relative to the utility implied by
the adoption decision.21
Second, uponpurchasingahandset, consumer ilearnshiscontacts’operatorchoices
(updating ^aj=aj), and selects operator sequence ai(maximizing Equation 7).
Consumer surplus. The net present value of consumer surplus through ~Tis:
U~T
net=X
i2STandxi~T2
4~TX
txitEuit(pt;t;xGi;a) xiphandset
xi+~Tphandset
~T3
5
which is net of calling, hassle, and handset costs.28
4.4.Expectations.
Firms.Given ﬁrm actions, there are many potential adoption equilibria. I restrict
consideration to equilibria in which ﬁrms anticipate a degree of continuity in the
subgame played by consumers. Speciﬁcally, consider indexing adoption equilibria by
some index e. If consumers play an equilibrium of index ein the subgame resulting
from actions (p0;p1;z0;z1), ﬁrms believe that they will also play an equilibrium of
indexein the subgame resulting from (p00;p10;z00;z10). Conditional on consumers
adopting according to e, the overall equilibrium is unique.
Consumers. I focus on families of consumer adoption equilibria eAandeAalong two
dimensions. First, I index the speed of adoption, focusing on the earliest ( e) or latest
(e) adoption equilibria. Second, I index whether operator choices favor the incumbent
(A= 0) or entrant ( A= 1)(similar to Jia (2008)). Along these dimensions, adoption
equilibria form a lattice.29
28I assume that at the end of the horizon, handsets are valued at the prevailing price.
29xhas a lattice structure because EtUai;xi
i(p;;xGi;^aGi)is supermodular in x(Topkis, 1978;
Milgrom and Shannon, 1994). i’s optimal adoption date xiis weakly monotonic in his type i,
contact’s adoption date xj, and contact’s coverage aj
j. Likewise, conditional on x,ahas a lattice
structure because coverage choices are complementary. As long as coverage provided by the two
ﬁrms is ordered (one weakly greater for all consumers), consumers weakly prefer to be on the same
network as their contacts and EtUai;xi
i(p;;xGi;aGi)is supermodular in aiandaj, conditional on
xGi. Note that it may be possible to achieve lower or higher adoption, or more favor towards one
operator, intheoverallgamebyliftingtherestrictionofcontinuityinconsumeradoptionequilibria, if
ﬁrms had suﬃciently discontinuous oﬀ path beliefs. For example, if ﬁrms believe that when pF~p,
consumers will adopt according to the fastest adoption equilibrium, but for pF6=~p, consumers will
adopt according to the slowest, this ‘punishment’ could induce ﬁrms to set a lower price than if they22
Eachmonth t, individualslearnthecurrenthandsetpriceandexpecthandsetprices
in future periods to decline at an exponential rate consistent with the overall decline
over this period: Etphandset
x =!x tphandset
tfor!=phandset
T
phandset
01
T. If an individual
forecasts diﬀerently, the error will be captured in his type (0
i;1
i).30
Prior to purchasing a handset, ibelieves that each contact jwill use the operator
^aj(p;)that is optimal given prices and coverage at j’s location, for calls to the
median individual at month T.31
4.5.Equilibrium. Given the incumbent’s initial subscribers S0and towers, con-
sumer types, interconnection fee f, and horizon ~T,
An equilibrium of indexeis(p0;p1;z0;z1;x;a;d)such that:
1. The entrant selects price sequence p1, and constructs urban towers z1=z(0%),
anticipating the choices of the incumbent and consumers:
p1= arg max
p1~T
1 
p0(p1);p1;z0(p1);z1;
x(p0(p1);p1;z0(p1);z1;;e);
a(p0(p1);p1;z0(p1);z1;;e);
d(p0(p1);p1;z0(p1);z1;;e);f!
believed that consumers would adopt according to similarly optimistic or pessimistic equilibria in
each subgame.
30Note that this structure implies that individuals do not anticipate how later adopters will respond
to their actions, because later adopters may not condition their strategy on actions in prior periods.
It also introduces a slight inconsistency: when idecides whether to adopt in period xi, he does not
know future handset prices, but does know the adoption dates of his future contacts, which will
have incorporated future handset prices. I tolerate this inconsistency in order to have a computable
notion of equilibrium.
31That is, ^aj(p;) = arg min a
pa
T+coveragea
jTam
mT
, for median individual m, who selects his
operator analogously: am=^am(p;m). In the Supplemental Appendix, I also consider approximate
equilibria where consumers correctly anticipate contacts’ operator choices; results are similar.23
2. The incumbent selects price sequence p0=p0(p1)and tower construction
plan z0=z0(p1), anticipating the choices of consumers:
p0(p1);z0(p1) = arg max
p0;z0~T
0 
p0;p1;z0;z1;
x(p0;p1;z0;z1;;e);
a(p0;p1;z0;z1;;e);
d(p0;p1;z0;z1;;e);f!
3. Consumers adopt at times x=x(p;z;;e), using operators a=a(p;z;;e)
and placing calls d=d(p;z;;e)such that:
Each initial adopter i2S0selects operator sequence ai2f0;1gToptimally,
believing each contact jwill adopt at time xjusing operators aj
Every other observed adopter i2STnS0believes each contact jwill adopt at
timexj, and selects:
–adoption date xi2f1;:::;Tgoptimally, believing jwill use predicted
operator ^aj(p;j;median )
–operator sequence ai2f0;1gT xioptimally, believing juses operators aj
Each month tafter adopting, icalls contact jfordijt=Edij(pt;t;a)seconds
4.6.Discussion.
Dark network. In the transaction data I do not observe the ‘dark’ network of individ-
ualsi2NnSTthat did not become customers of the incumbent by T, nor latent links
ijwould have only become active had conditions been more favorable. This would
cause me to underestimate demand if counterfactual calling prices were lower than
what I observe in my data. Since prices were declining over this period, I limit the
impact by computing counterfactuals through shorter horizons ~TTduring which24
counterfactual prices would be no more favorable than observed conditions through
T.32Main results use a horizon computed using variation in both handset and calling
prices using the structural model and a representative survey covering part of the
dark network (RIA, 2012); the Supplemental Appendix reports a conservative hori-
zon limited to the observed variation in calling prices.33Additionally, I assume that
subscribers of the poorly run competitor (Operator B) do not change their decisions
in counterfactuals; this will tend to attenuate the eﬀects of competition.
Firm action spaces. I restrict ﬁrm action spaces in three respects:
I oﬀer ﬁrms only options that are reasonable in the long term, to limit the impact
of observing a ﬁnite horizon. Firms neglect the value of their accumulated stock
of subscribers after ~T. As a result, my results may underestimate incentives to in-
vest. I assess results for a long horizon (4 years), and assess diﬀerent horizons in the
Supplemental Appendix.
I rule out the possibility that either ﬁrm would build towers in locations that were
notservedunderthebaselinescenario, becauseitwouldbediﬃculttopredictdemand
in those locations. These are few: the incumbent’s actual rollout plan ( z(100%)) was
nearly complete (see Figure 3).
I rule out strategies where ﬁrms divide up the country to serve diﬀerent rural areas,
because adoption equilibria form a lattice only if coverage provided by the two ﬁrms
are ordered (one weakly greater for all consumers). In other countries in the region it
is common for ﬁrms to be ordered in terms of coverage, with the lowest quality ﬁrms
oﬀering coverage only in cities.34
32This is akin to speeding up a ﬁlm using fast forward, but pausing before it runs out of tape.
33For more details and deﬁnitions of these horizons, see Supplemental Appendix S5.
34See Supplemental Appendix for more evidence on this.25
Table 3. Additional Parameters
Parameter Value Source
Consumer Preferences
Switching Cost s $36.09 Hypothetical switching exercises
Idiosyncratic operator preference
:::Mean m(f0
i 1
ig)$2.45 Hypothetical switching exercises
:::SD (f1
i 0
ig)$6.72 Hypothetical switching exercises
Firm Costs
Cost of operating a tower Krural $80,584/year Regulator study RURA (2011)
Incremental cost icY
Li;onnetij* Interconnection study PwC (2011)
Fixed cost fcF* Interconnection study PwC (2011)
See Appendix A for discussion and validation. *: The study was provided under the condition that
it remain conﬁdential.
5.Estimation
The main demand parameters ( Fij,,,cost,coverage,0
i;0
i) are estimated in
Björkegren (2019) under the baseline scenario. These elasticities will determine how
subscribers trade oﬀ price and coverage oﬀerings (both at his own and contacts’
locations).
Switching costs ( s) and the distribution of idiosyncratic operator preferences ( f0
i 
1
ig) were estimated from hypothetical switching exercises in a survey of 89 Rwandan
phone owners. Firm costs ( Krural,icY
Li;onnetij,fcF) were calibrated based on regulator
studies. See Table 3 for parameter values and Appendix A for details.
6.Simulation
The incumbent’s initial subscribers and towers are taken as given. Given policy
choicesf, equilibrium index e2 feA;eAg, and individual types , I compute an
equilibrium in three nested steps:
(1)Consumer choices
For a grid of price choices (p0;p1)and rolloutsz0, I compute an adoption
equilibrium using an iterated best response method that has two stages:26
(a)Adoption dates x: Iinitializewithacandidateadoptionpathrepresenting
a complete delay of adoption for eA(x=T), or immediate adoption for
eA(x= 0). Each individual optimizes their adoption date xi, conditional
on the adoption dates of others x iand beliefs about others’ operators
^a i(p; i;median ), until xconverges.
(b)Operators a:Conditional on equilibrium adoption dates x, I initialize
with all individuals subscribing to operator A(aA). Each individual
optimizes their operator choice ai, conditional on the operator choices of
others ( ^a i=a i), until aconverges.
(2)Incumbent choices
The incumbent selects p0(p1)andz0(p1)to maximize proﬁts through ~T,
anticipating consumer choices in equilibrium e.
(3)Entrant choices
The entrant selects p1to maximize proﬁts through ~T, anticipating incum-
bent and consumer choices in equilibrium e.
For the lower equilibrium eA, I set individuals’ types to their lower bound ( =),
to recover a lower bound of the adoption equilibrium. For the upper equilibrium eA,
I set individuals’ types to their upper bound ( =) to recover an upper bound.35
For simplicity, I assume that consumers may switch operators at most once.
Idiosyncratic preferences for the entrant are treated as random parameters: for
each individual I draw iiidN[m(0
i 1
i);(1
i 0
i)], and compute [1
i;1
i] =
[0
i i;0
i i]. I present results from a single random draw and assess the eﬀect
of the random draw in the Supplemental Appendix.
35See Supplemental Appendix S6 for pseudocode.27
Table 4. Market Outcomes under Competition
Outcomes (January 2005-December 2008)
Call Prices Rollout Plan C. Proﬁt Gov.
Surplus Incumbent Entrant Revenue
p0
pbasep1
pbase z0
$m $m $m $m
Baseline Scenario 1.00, 1.00 - z(100%) 168, 194 108, 126 0, 0 58, 66
Additional Competitor 0.70, 0.60 0.60, 0.50 z(100%) 281, 365 98, 104 5, 2 62, 68
Each cell reports the low and high incumbent-favoring equilibrium. Competitor is introduced
under interconnection f= $0:11/minute starting at t= 0(1/2005). Proﬁts omit ﬁxed costs of
operation and license fees. Utility and revenue reported in 2005 U.S. Dollars, discounted at a rate
of. Consumer surplus includes the surplus utility each individual receives from the call model
through December 2008, minus the cost of holding a handset from the time of adoption until
December 2008.
7.The Effects of Competition
Iconsidercounterfactualsthataddanadditionalcompetitor,investigateinvestment
eﬀects, and then consider diﬀerent policies (interconnection rates, number portability,
and delay). I report outcomes on prices, towers built, returns on investment (ROI),
consumer surplus, proﬁts, government revenue, and total welfare. In the main text, I
focus on incumbent-favoring equilibria and refer to the lowest equilibrium outcomes
(e0) in text (and place the highest equilibrium e0outcomes in parentheses, or omit
if identical). I present results from January 2005 to December 2008 (which under a
model of the dark network would not be aﬀected by the omission of dark nodes for
prices as low as 20% of the baseline price path).36
I ﬁnd:
36Results tables omit ﬁxed costs, which based on accounting I estimate to lie between $1-16m for
the entrant and are included in welfare estimates in the text. Results also omit license fees, which
represent additional transfers to the government. The government charged the entrant $4m per year
to operate its network when it did enter. Normal form game boards are shown in the Supplemental
Appendix.28
7.1.Competition lowers prices and can increase incentives to invest. I com-
pare outcomes under baseline, and if an additional competitor had been added with
a focal interconnection rate of f= $0:11/minute (Table 4 rows 1 and 2; each cell re-
ports the low and high equilibrium). Under this policy, the incumbent would reduce
prices to 70% (60%) of the baseline price path, and the entrant to 60% (50%).37The
incumbent would have still built all rural towers.
This lowers proﬁts for the incumbent but has a large impact on consumer surplus:
lower prices bring more users to the network, which also increases the value each user
gets from the network. Altogether, the total welfare provided by the mobile phone
systemwouldhaveincreasedby33%(38%; comparingrow1androw2). Thisincrease
in welfare is an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP or 3-5% of oﬃcial development aid
in Rwanda over the same period.38
Incentives to invest are driven by business stealing. To more ﬁnely investigate invest-
ment, I evaluate the eﬀects of building rural towers. Starting from equilibrium, I
compute how consumers would adopt and use the network if the 50% of rural tow-
ers in the lowest population areas were omitted ( z0=z(50%)). I then compute the
returns to building the full set of towers ( z0=z(100%)), allowing consumers to change
adoption dates, operators, and usage. Table 5 reports the incumbent’s incremental
proﬁts and ROI from building these rural towers, in the baseline scenario and under
an additional competitor. Under the baseline scenario the incumbent earns positive
proﬁts and an ROI of 0.98 (1.00) from building these towers (ﬁrst row). But it earns
morefrom building these towers when it faces an additional competitor: its incre-
mental proﬁts are higher, and its ROI increases to 1.40 (1.26; second row). When the
37The price series is shown in Figure 2.
38Over the horizon from 2005-2008, in the baseline scenario the incumbent provided a social surplus
of $334m ($386m), an amount equivalent to 2-3% of Rwanda’s GDP over the same time period.
In this equilibrium, the entrant earns slightly negative proﬁts. This suggests that sustaining this
market structure may require subsidizing the entrant on the order of $8m (4% of the total welfare
generated), or the promise of an acquisition or additional future proﬁts as the network grows.29
Table 5. Return on Tower Investment
Equilibrium Eﬀect of
Incumbent Building Low Population Towers
Call Prices Proﬁt ROI
p0
pbasep1
pbase Incumbent Entrant Incumbent Social
$m $m
Baseline Scenario 1.00, 1.00 - 1.27, 1.23 - 0.98, 1.00 6.64, 6.49
Additional Competitor 0.70, 0.60 0.60, 0.50 1.99, 1.87 -1.27, -1.25 1.40, 1.26 7.74, 7.96
...ﬁxing operator 0.39, 0.22 0.022, 0.002 0.43, 0.25 6.89, 6.92
...add’l eﬀect of operator choice 1.60, 1.65 -1.30, -1.26 - -
Each cell reports results in the low and high incumbent-favoring equilibrium. Eﬀect cells report the
diﬀerence in outcomes between the adoption equilibrium that results when the lowest 50%
population rural towers are built, and the one where the incumbent is constrained to not build
them. Outcomes computed from January 2005 through horizon December 2008. ‘Fixed operator’
allows consumers to change adoption dates and usage but holds operator choices ﬁxed; consumers
who originally switch operators do so on the latest of the original switch date and the new
adoption date. Social ROI represents consumer surplus, government revenue, and ﬁrm proﬁt,
relative to ﬁrm costs. ROI is not relevant for the incremental eﬀect of operator choice since the
cost of the towers has already been accounted for. Utility and revenue reported in 2005 U.S.
Dollars, discounted at a rate of . Consumer surplus includes the surplus utility each individual
receives from the call model through December 2008, minus the cost of holding a handset from the
time of adoption until December 2008.
incumbent builds these towers, it decreases the proﬁts of the entrant. Under either
market structure, private ROI is far lower than the social ROI of as much as 7.74
(7.96), suggesting this market may see underinvestment.
To better understand this eﬀect, I decompose it. Starting from equilibria where the
incumbent is forced to omit building the lowest population rural towers ( z0=z(50%)),
I compute the returns to building the full set of towers ( z0=z(100%)) in two stages.
First, I hold ﬁxed the choice of operator, but allow consumers to change adoption
dates and usage. Then, I allow consumers full choice over usage, adoption, and
operator.
If operator choices were held ﬁxed (Table 5 row 3), the towers would earn the
incumbent only a small amount of proﬁts and a lower ROI of 0.43 (0.25). The entrant
beneﬁts from the incumbent’s tower construction in two ways:30
(1) The entrant’s subscribers call contacts in the incumbent’s network more (due
to better reception, and because that causes some of the incumbent’s sub-
scribers to adopt earlier, which causes others to adopt earlier). These ad-
ditional calls at the network border (entrant’s oﬀ-net calls) account for 89%
(98%) of the additional revenue that accrues to the entrant. These spillovers
can partially be recouped: 56% (76%) is paid back to the incumbent through
interconnection fees.
(2) Adoption spillovers lead to additional usage inside the entrant’s network as
well. 11% (2%) of the revenue results from spillovers in the interior of the
entrant’s network (entrant on-net calls). Interconnection fees do not adjust
for these interior spillovers because they are incurred only at the boundaries of
the two networks.39Altogether, only a small amount of beneﬁts spill over into
the entrant’s network: the incumbent still captures 95% (99%) of the proﬁts
from investing, when operator choices are held ﬁxed.
When consumers are able to adjust all choices, including operator, urban consumers
who spend a fraction of their time in rural areas switch networks to the incumbent
to take advantage of its improved coverage (Table 5 row 4).40This business stealing
eﬀectdominates: itaccountsfor80%(88%)oftheproﬁttheincumbentearnsfromthe
investment, dwarﬁng the network eﬀects that the incumbent no longer internalizes.
Altogether, although competition reduces the incumbent’s total proﬁt, it can in-
creasethe marginal returns to an investment that retains customers who otherwise
would switch. The eﬀect of competition on investment depends on the relative size of
network and business stealing eﬀects; and, as we will see next, on the interconnection
policy.
39The magnitude of these internal spillovers will depend on the shape of the entrant’s network, as
well as the degree of network spillovers: they require the entrant’s network to be both porous to
adoption spillovers, and suﬃciently deep that spillovers reach beyond the border.
40For a breakdown of switchers see Figure A1.31
7.2.Compatibility introduces a tradeoﬀ between prices and incentives to
invest.Next I consider selecting diﬀerent interconnection rate policies. Figure 4
shows results as a function of the interconnection rate. The left column shows out-
comes under the baseline scenario; and the right column when an additional competi-
tor is granted a license at month t= 0under diﬀerent interconnection rates (shown
decreasing with the x-axis).
The focal interconnection rate of f= $0:11(shown in a dotted line) is slightly
higher than recommendations at that time ( f= $0:07(RURA, 2006) or $0:09(PwC,
2011)), and zero rating ( f= $0: ‘bill and keep,’ to which the U.S. is transitioning
(FCC, 2019)).
The interconnection rate acts like a tax on oﬀ-network calls; as the interconnection
fee is lowered, ﬁrms lower their prices (top panel).
However there is a tradeoﬀ: as the interconnection rate is lowered, the ROI of
building low population rural towers declines (middle panel). This is because lower
prices lead to lower revenues, and additionally the incumbent recoups less intercon-
nection payments for the spillover beneﬁts it provides to the other network. The ROI
is always above zero so it would still have been proﬁtable to build the towers.
Finally, as the interconnection rate is lowered, welfare increases and incumbent
proﬁts decline (bottom panel).
If ﬁrms are allowed to select the interconnection rate (to maximize the proﬁts of ei-
ther the incumbent, or the two ﬁrms jointly), they will set it high ( f= $0:33or$0:43,
beyond the bounds of Figure 4). That would mute the eﬀect of competition on prices
(80-90% of baseline scenario) and welfare.41This is reminiscent of many emerging
networkgoods, whereinterconnectiondoesnotariseendogenously(KatzandShapiro,
41I allow the incumbent to select the interconnection rate on a grid from $0.00 to $0.43. Note that
results could diﬀer if ﬁrms were allowed to set separate prices for on- and oﬀ-net calls.32
Figure 4. Market Outcomes as Function of Interconnection Rate
Baseline Scenario Additional Competitor
Price Entr ant Price Incumbent high low
●
0.000.250.500.751.00
$0Call Price ( pFpbase)
●● ● ●● ●● ●●
●●●● ●● ●●●● ●●●
●●● ●●
●●● ●● ●● ●●
●●
●● ●● ●●●● ●●●
●●● ●●
$0.00 $0.05 $0.10 $0.15
Interconnection Rate (per minute)
□
0%50%100%150%
$0ROI
□□
□ □□ □□ □□
□
$0.00 $0.05 $0.10 $0.15
Interconnection Rate (per min ute)Incumbent’s ROI of Building Rural Towers 
●
●●●
●
$0$200$400
$0Value ($m)
●●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●●●●
●●
●
●●
●
$0.00 $0.05 $0.10 $0.15
Interconnection Rate (per minute)●●C Surplus Gov Revenue Profit Entrant Profit Incumbent ●high low
The left column shows outcomes under the baseline scenario; and the right column when an
additional competitor is granted a license at month t= 0under diﬀerent interconnection rates
(shown decreasing with the x-axis). Outcomes computed from January 2005 through horizon
December 2008. Dotted line denotes a focal interconnection rate that balances competitive
pressure with incentives to invest. Filled marks denote high equilibrium and open marks denote
low equilibrium. All equilibria shown have entrant moving ﬁrst, and consumers favoring
incumbent. Outcomes reported in 2005 U.S. Dollars, discounted at a rate of . Consumer surplus
includes the surplus utility each individual receives from the call model through December 2008,
minus the cost of holding a handset from the time of adoption until December 2008.33
1985), as well as theoretical results that ﬁrms may use the interconnection rate as an
instrument of collusion (Armstrong, 1998; Laﬀont et al., 1998).
7.3.Additional Policies. Table 6 repeats the baseline and focal competition policy,
and considers two additional policies:
7.3.1. Number portability. Policies that allow consumers to port their phone numbers
between operators have been planned or implemented by 40% of developing country
regulators (GSMA, 2013).42My consumer survey suggests that number portability
would lower users’ hassle cost of switching operators from $36.09 to $18.51. Number
portability lowers prices, incumbent proﬁts, and increases consumer surplus in the
lower equilibrium but has muted eﬀects in the upper (Table 6 row 3).43Given the
choice, the incumbent would elect to maintain high switching costs.
7.3.2. Delayed entry. If entry of the competitor is delayed until July 2008 (5 months
before the end of the horizon), the entrant sets lower prices (40% (30%) of baseline
price path), the incumbent keeps prices weakly higher (70%), and the total impact
on welfare is smaller (Table 4 row 4).
7.4.Robustness. I assess several alternate speciﬁcations in the Supplemental Ap-
pendix (S8-S14):
ROIfortowerconstructionisweaklylargerunderthefocalcompetitionpolicyforan
expandedsetofrolloutplans(incumbentselecting z02fz(100%);z(75%);z(50%);z(25%);z(0%)g
versus entrant z1=z(0%)) in a partial equilibrium analysis that holds prices ﬁxed.
The 10 towers built under government coverage obligation that were unproﬁtable
under the baseline (Björkegren, 2019) are proﬁtable under this competition policy,
suggesting that in some settings competition may substitute for access regulation.
42Rwanda initially planned to introduce portability when mobile operators reached combined 60%
market penetration, but as of this writing has yet to do so.
43This distinction between the low and high equilibrium is likely due to the grid of choices.34
Table 6. Additional Competition Policies
Outcomes (January 2005-December 2008)
Switch. Call Prices C. Incumbent Entrant Gov.
Cost Surplus Proﬁt Proﬁt Revenue
sp0
pbasep1
pbase
$ $m $m $m $m
Baseline Scenario - 1.00, 1.00 - 168, 194 108, 126 0, 0 58, 68
Additional Competitor 36 0.70, 0.60 0.60, 0.50 281, 365 98, 104 5, 2 62, 68
Number portability 19 0.50, 0.60 0.50, 0.50 384, 366 88, 101 -1, 5 61, 68
Delayed entry (7/2008) 36 0.70, 0.70 0.40, 0.30 259, 284 98, 109 2, 2 59, 65
Each row presents the outcomes under a given policy, in the low and high incumbent-favoring equilibria. All
competitive results are under f= $0:11/minute; unless denoted, entry is 1/2005. Proﬁts omit ﬁxed costs of
operation and license fees. Utility and revenue reported in 2005 U.S. Dollars, discounted at a rate of .
Consumer surplus includes the surplus utility each individual receives from the call model through December
2008, minus the cost of holding a handset from the time of adoption until December 2008.
Results are similar under diﬀerent time horizons ( ~T). A conservative time horizon
(through Dec 2005) sees analogous price reductions and welfare increases.44Under a
longer horizon through period Tplus that ﬁnal month played repeatedly for 3 years,
competition increases ROI even for lower interconnection rates. Results are similar to
the main results under diﬀerent draws of the random preferences [1
i;1
i], and under
entrant-favoring equilibria. If at the point of adoption, consumers exactly anticipate
which operators their contacts will select ( ^ajaj), consumer decisions are no longer
guaranteed to reach equilibrium, but outcomes are similar under an approximate
notion of equilibrium. If the regulator has the incumbent move before the entrant, or
the ﬁrms move simultaneously, are less stable for this grid of prices, but are similar for
prices and welfare. The ROI eﬀects are less stable, but there still exist competition
policies that would increase ROI for at least one adoption equilibria.
Simpler demand systems can substantially mischaracterize results in a classical
network industry. Ignoring the dependence between individuals’ decisions results in
44The conservative time horizon covers the construction of few rural towers, so is not well suited to
answering questions about investment.35
underestimating the revenue from building towers by 52% (56%); considering links as
stochastic draws (Ryan and Tucker, 2012) results in overestimating it by as much as
86%.
Iﬁndsimilarwelfareeﬀectsinthemonopolymodelif, ratherthanfacinganentrant,
the incumbent were simply forced to lower its price to the later competitive level.
However, this should be viewed mostly as a check on the model, as I do not consider
the downsides to price regulation.
8.Conclusion
Societies are grappling with an increasing number of industries characterized by
network eﬀects. This paper simulates the eﬀects of competition policy in a network
industry of particular importance to developing societies, mobile phone networks.
I demonstrate how data from a dominant incumbent can be used to estimate the
eﬀects of a variety of competition policies. My method captures how changes ripple
throughout networks and across network boundaries, and can thus assess how the
policy environment aﬀects incentives to invest.
I ﬁnd that competition in the Rwandan mobile phone industry has a large scope
to aﬀect welfare. Policies to increase competition have mixed eﬀects on incentives
to invest: they split the revenue generated by an investment, but for high enough
interconnection rates this eﬀect is dominated by increased returns from diﬀerentiat-
ing quality. It is an open question whether these results would be similar for mobile
internet, which still has low penetration in much of Africa. While I focus on the
primary investments in this network, in rural towers, network ﬁrms have a menu of
potential investments which would be diﬀerentially aﬀected by competition. Compe-
tition will tend to make investments that induce a marginal customer to switch more
attractive, and investments that induce dispersed network spillovers less attractive.
Competition is thus likely to aﬀect the nature of network products provided by the36
market. Overall, this paper suggests that competition policy in emerging networks
can have profound welfare implications.
References
Argent, J. and N. Pogorelsky (2011): “EnhancingPerformanceinTelecommunications
to Improve Rwandan Competitiveness,” .
Armstrong, M. (1998): “Network Interconnection in Telecommunications,” The Economic
Journal, 108, 545–564.
Bajari, P., C. L. Benkard, and J. Levin (2007): “Estimating Dynamic Models of
Imperfect Competition,” Econometrica , 75, 1331–1370.
Björkegren, D. (2014): “The Value and Spread of Information: Evidence from a Mobile
Phone Discount,” .
——— (2019): “The Adoption of Network Goods: Evidence from the Spread of Mobile
Phones in Rwanda,” The Review of Economic Studies , 86, 1033–1060.
Cambini, C. and Y. Jiang (2009): “Broadband investment and regulation: A literature
review,” Telecommunications Policy , 33, 559–574.
Ericson, R. and A. Pakes (1995): “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework
for Empirical Work,” The Review of Economic Studies , 62, 53–82.
Faccio, M. and L. Zingales (2017): “Political Determinants of Competition in the Mo-
bile Telecommunication Industry,” Working Paper 23041, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Farr, T. G., P. A. Rosen, E. Caro, R. Crippen, R. Duren, S. Hensley, M. Ko-
brick, M. Paller, E. Rodriguez, L. Roth, D. Seal, S. Shaffer, J. Shimada,
J. Umland, M. Werner, M. Oskin, D. Burbank, and D. Alsdorf (2007): “The
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission,” Reviews of Geophysics , 45.
Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer (2007): “Chapter 31 Coordination and Lock-In: Compe-
tition with Switching Costs and Network Eﬀects,” in Handbook of Industrial Organization ,
ed. by M. Armstrong and R. Porter, Elsevier, vol. Volume 3, 1967–2072.
Farronato, C., J. Fong, and A. Fradkin (2020): “Dog Eat Dog: Measuring Net-
work Eﬀects Using a Digital Platform Merger,” Tech. Rep. w28047, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
FCC(2019): “Updating the Intercarrier Compensation Regime To Eliminate Access Arbi-
trage,” .
Genakos, C., T. Valletti, and F. Verboven (2018): “Evaluating market consolidation
in mobile communications,” Economic Policy , 33, 45–100.
Goettler, R. L. and B. R. Gordon (2011): “Does AMD Spur Intel to Innovate More?”
Journal of Political Economy , 119, 1141–1200.
Goolsbee, A. and P. J. Klenow (2002): “Evidence on Learning and Network External-
ities in the Diﬀusion of Home Computers,” Journal of Law and Economics , 45, 317–343.
Gowrisankaran, G. and M. Rysman (2012): “Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New
Durable Goods,” Journal of Political Economy , 120, 1173–1219.
Gowrisankaran, G., M. Rysman, and M. Park (2010): “Measuring Network Eﬀects
in a Dynamic Environment,” Tech. rep., SSRN, Rochester, NY.37
Grajek, M. and L.-H. Röller (2012): “RegulationandInvestmentinNetworkIndustries:
Evidence from European Telecoms,” The Journal of Law and Economics , 55, 189–216,
publisher: The University of Chicago Press.
GSMA(2013): “Majority of developing world mobile markets have no plans for MNP,” .
Handel, B. and J. Schwartzstein (2018): “FrictionsorMentalGaps: What’sBehindthe
Information We (Don’t) Use and When Do We Care?” Journal of Economic Perspectives ,
32, 155–178.
Igami, M. (2017): “Estimating the Innovator’s Dilemma: Structural Analysis of Creative
Destruction in the Hard Disk Drive Industry, 1981–1998,” Journal of Political Economy ,
125, 798–847, publisher: The University of Chicago Press.
IGIHE.com (2011): “The collapse of Rwandatel: What went wrong?” .
Jarvis, A., H. Reuter, A. Nelson, and E. Guevara (2008): “Hole-ﬁlled seamless
SRTM data V4,” CIAT.
Jia, P.(2008): “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis
of the Discount Retailing Industry,” Econometrica , 76, 1263–1316.
Katz, M. L. and C. Shapiro (1985): “Network Externalities, Competition, and Compat-
ibility,” The American Economic Review , 75, 424–440.
——— (1994): “Systems Competition and Network Eﬀects,” The Journal of Economic Per-
spectives, 8, 93–115.
Laffont, J.-J., P. Rey, and J. Tirole (1998): “Network Competition: I. Overview and
Nondiscriminatory Pricing,” The RAND Journal of Economics , 29, 1–37.
Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (2001): Competition in Telecommunications , MIT Press,
google-Books-ID: ucS5F4lg6TkC.
Lazauskaite, V. (2009): “Mobile Termination Rates: To Regulate or Not To Regulate,” .
Lee, R. S. (2013): “Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Mar-
kets,” American Economic Review , 103, 2960–3000.
Manganelli, A. and A. Nicita (2020): “Competition Enhancement and Investment
Promotion,” in The Governance of Telecom Markets: Economics, Law and Institutions in
Europe, ed. by A. Manganelli and A. Nicita, Cham: Springer International Publishing,
Palgrave Studies in Institutions, Economics and Law, 89–109.
Milgrom, P. and C. Shannon (1994): “Monotone Comparative Statics,” Econometrica ,
62, 157–180.
Moody’s (2015): “Africa’s maturing telecoms sector to see further M&A activ-
ity,” Https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-Africas-maturing-telecoms-sector-to-
see-further-MA-activity–PR_325275.
Ohashi, H. (2003): “The Role of Network Eﬀects in the US VCR Market, 1978-1986,”
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy , 12, 447–494.
Pakes, A., M. Ostrovsky, and S. Berry (2008): “Simple estimators for the parameters
ofdiscretedynamicgames(withentry/exitexamples),” The RAND Journal of Economics ,
38, 373–399.
PwC(2011): “Rwanda Interconnection Costing Model,” .
ResearchICTAfrica (2017): “After Access Survey,” Tech. rep.
Reuters (2017): “Report recommends Safaricom should be broken up: Business Daily,” .
RIA(2012): “Household Survey,” Research ICT Africa .
RURA(2006): “Annual Report,” .
——— (2009): “Interconnection Guidelines,” .38
——— (2011): “Guidelines for Siting and Sharing of Telecommunication Base Station In-
frastructure,” Republic of Rwanda .
Ryan, S. P. and C. Tucker (2012): “Heterogeneity and the dynamics of technology
adoption,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics , 10, 63–109.
Saloner, G. and A. Shepard (1995): “Adoption of Technologies with Network Eﬀects:
An Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines,” The RAND
Journal of Economics , 26, 479–501.
TMG(2011): “On-net/Oﬀ-net Price Diﬀerentiation: Review of International Precedent,” .
Topkis, D. M. (1978): “Minimizing a Submodular Function on a Lattice,” Operations
Research , 26, 305–321.
Tucker, C. (2008): “Identifying Formal and Informal Inﬂuence in Technology Adoption
with Network Externalities,” Management Science , 54, 2024–2038.
Valletti, T. M. and C. Cambini (2005): “Investments and Network Competition,” The
RAND Journal of Economics , 36, 446–467.
Vogelsang, I. (2013): “The Endgame of Telecommunications Policy? A Survey,” Jahrbuch
fur Wirtschaftswissenschaften / Review of Economics , 64, 193–269.
Williams, M. D. J., R. Mayer, and M. Minges (2011): Africa’s ICT Infrastructure :
Building on the Mobile Revolution , World Bank.
World Bank (2004): A Model for Calculating Interconnection Costs in Telecommunica-
tions, World Bank Publications.
——— (2013): “International Best Practices Report on Telecommunications Regulations,” .
WSJ(2006): “An Entrepreneur Has Quixotic Goal Of Wiring Rwanda,” Wall Street Journal .39
Appendix A.Additional Parameters
Additional demand parameters. I estimate demand parameters using the survey
of 89 mobile phone subscribers.
Switching operators entails changing phone numbers, coverage, and learning new
short code commands. The mean switching cost is s= $36:09(s.e. $6:03), cor-
responding to 6.8 months of household average airtime spending in 2010 (EICV).
Roughly half of that cost ( $17:58) arises from having to change phone numbers. High
switching costs are commonly found in the literature (Handel and Schwartzstein,
2018).
Holding ﬁxed prices and coverage, consumers have a slight idiosyncratic preference
for the incumbent, with a diﬀerence with mean m(0
i 1
i) = $2:45($0:01per month),
and standard deviation (1
i 0
i) = $6:72. These preferences are not correlated with
observables, and when asked to explain their choices, the most common response was
a preference for one operator’s branding or color scheme.
Validation. I validate the quality of hypothetical responses by comparing to an anal-
ogous choice observed in the data. It is much less costly to switch between plans on
the same operator; actions in the data are consistent with an intraoperator switching
cost of $6.83. I ﬁnd that this does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly at the 1% level from the
estimate formed from analogous hypothetical choices.45The survey estimated param-
eters do not have a major eﬀect on results: idiosyncratic preferences are very close
to zero, and in counterfactuals I ﬁnd that dropping the switching cost to $18.51 does
not have a major eﬀect on results. Supplemental Appendix S4 assesses the extent to
which the model matches behavior observed later in Rwanda, and in countries that
were competitive at this time.
45For part of this time, the operator oﬀered plans billed by the minute or the second, see Björkegren
(2014). I model the introduction of per second billing in 2006 as a price decline.40
Firm costs. I use ﬁrm costs from two Rwandan regulator studies.
I use accounting ﬁxed costs fcFand the incremental costs of scaling the size of
the network icY
Li;onnetijfrom PwC (2011), a conﬁdential cost study commissioned to
set interconnection rates. This study constructs an engineering breakdown of the
network, using cost estimates obtained from operators, crosschecked against inter-
national benchmarks.46It combines the costs of towers, switching equipment, staﬀ,
central operations, and capital to compute the Long Run Incremental Cost (LRIC)
of operating a network that can serve an additional second of voice.47I break down
these costs to better match my setup, in three ways. First, the study inﬂates the
incremental cost estimates with a proportional markup to cover ﬁxed costs of oper-
ating the network. I report these ﬁxed costs separately, by multiplying each ﬁrm’s
total incremental cost by the same proportional markup used in the study (50%) after
identifying the size of the ﬁrm in equilibrium.48Second, I remove the license fee paid
to the regulator, which is a pure transfer. Third, I separate out the cost of rural tower
investments. For subscribers who primarily use urban towers ( Li=urban), I include
thecostoftowersinincrementalcosts, asurbantowerconstructiontendstoscalewith
call volumes. For subscribers who primarily use rural towers ( Li=rural), I compute
the cost of towers separately, as rural tower construction scales with coverage.
I use the annualized cost of building and operating a rural tower, Krural, from
RURA (2011), a public study commissioned to set the regulated prices of infrastruc-
ture sharing based on cost data from operators.49
46PwC (2011) replaced cost items that did not seem consistent with average estimates the ﬁrm had
collected from 7 other operators in Africa and the Middle East, omitting outliers.
47While marginal costs are in many cases zero in telecom, LRIC is more representative of the shifts
in costs that would be expected over the range of network scales I consider.
48Although these accounting ﬁxed costs may diﬀer from economic ﬁxed costs, conditional on intro-
ducing a competitor, ﬁxed cost estimates do not aﬀect ﬁrm behavior. The entrant’s ﬁxed cost does
aﬀect the welfare gains of introducing a competitor.
49The total annualized cost of owning and operating a tower is $51,000 per year, plus $29,584 for
rural towers powered by generators. This includes operating expenses, depreciation, and a 15% cost
of capital. Assumed lifespans are 15 years for towers, 8 for grid access, and 4 for generators.41
Figure A1. Eﬀects of Investment
Market Share and Marginal Users
0%25%50%75%100%
0% 25% 50% 75%
Days Spent in Urban Areas (Percentile)Market ShareEntrant Marginal Incumbent
The incumbent dominates market share among rural users; the entrant attracts away urban users.
When the incumbent builds rural towers (changing the rollout plan from z(50%)toz(100%)), it
induces the highlighted marginal group of users to switch from the entrant to the incumbent.
These marginal users spend most but not all of their time in urban areas, with the remainder in
rural areas. Interconnection rate $0.11/min, low equilibrium, incumbent-favoring (the high
equilibrium is visually indistinguishable).
Validation. BecauseRwanda’sregulatordoesnotinterveneinconsumertelecomprices,
the monopolist’s price choices allow a consistency check. Under these cost estimates,
the monopolist’s chosen prices are proﬁt maximizing.50Although the cost estimates
behind most interconnection studies are conﬁdential, the resulting interconnection
rates recommended by PwC (2011) are similar to those recommended on average in
Africa ($0.07 vs. $0.08 per minute; Lazauskaite (2009)), suggesting costs are similar
to other African markets.
50See Supplemental Appendix S7.