                             Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; volume 10:1039
[page 106]                                             [Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039]Cost analysis of integrated
community case managementof childhood malaria, diarrheaand pneumonia enhanced bymobile health technology inrural Zambia 
Godfrey Biemba,1,2Arnold Mulenga,3
Boniface Chiluba,4Ulla K Griffiths,5
Kojo Yeboah-Antwi,2
William MacLeod,4Karsten Lunze,2
Davidson H. Hamer2,6
1National Health Research Authority,
Lusaka, Zambia; 2Department of Global
Health, Boston University School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA;
3Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia;
4Zambia Centre for Applied Health
Research and Development, Lusaka,Zambia; 
5United Nations International
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), New York,USA; 
6Section of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, BostonMedical Center, Boston, MA, USA
Abstract
Integrated community case manage-
ment (iCCM) of malaria, diarrhea, and
pneumonia is a comprehensive, equity-based strategy to improve treatment accessfor underserved children under five yearsold. This paper presents data on cost ofiCCM and incremental costs of mHealthenhanced supervision and supply chainmanagement in Zambia. We collected costdata using three questionnaires applied atnational, district, health facility and com-munity levels. We interviewed 40 healthfacility supervisors and 75 communityhealth workers. A provider perspective andan ingredient costing method was used. Weentered and analyzed data in a customized
excel costing tool. The result shows that
total iCCM cost per patient contact wasUSD 18.43. The incremental cost of usingthe mHealth intervention per child contact
for all iCCM conditions was USD 11.35.The incremental cost per treatment of
diarrhea, pneumonia, and malaria withmHealth intervention was USD 9.58, USD10.37 and USD 12.82. Program costsaccounted for 67% of the total, and the lar-
gest share was associated with supervisionestimated at 36%, followed by supply chainmanagement at 27%. This study has provi-ded valuable information to policy makers
on how much it costs to implement iCCMprogram using mHealth interventions.Introduction 
Despite progress made in reducing child
mortality, pneumonia, diarrhea, and malaria
remain leading causes of death for childrenunder 5 years of age.
1Access to effective
and appropriate treatment for sick childrenis extremely low where it is needed most.
2
Globally, an estimated 5.9 million childrendie every year before the age of five; ofthese deaths, 17% are due to pneumonia,8% due to diarrhea, and 5% due to malaria.
3
Notably, sub-Saharan Africa is the regionwith the highest under five mortality global-ly.
3In Zambia, for example, one in every 13
children will die before their fifth birthday.4
Access to prompt and appropriate treatmentfor these common conditions is thereforecrucial in reducing mortality in childrenunder five years.
5Integrated community
case management (iCCM), implemented bywell trained, supplied, and supervised com-munity health workers (CHWs) has thepotential to reduce child mortality. 
Recognizing this, in 2012, the World
Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEFreleased a “Joint Statement for iCCM” as anequity-focused strategy to improve accessto case management, emphasizing impor-tant standard practices that should be part ofany such programming.
6 However, iCCM
implementation has faced challenges consi-dering the poor health care infrastructure,particularly in low-income countries likeZambia. Frequent stock outs of drugs andcommodities, such as malaria rapid diagno-stic tests (RDTs) and zinc supplements, area major challenge to the effectiveness ofiCCM. Similarly, studies have consideredinadequate supervision of CHWs as one ofthe most important bottlenecks to effectiveiCCM implementation.
7
In order to address supply chain mana-
gement challenges, mobile health(mHealth) innovations defined as “medicaland public health practice supported bymobile devices, such as mobile phones,
patient monitoring devices, personal digital
assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devi-ces”
1,8could offer potential solutions that
would help move control of stock levelsaway from central procurement systems tothe local level by partly redirecting the
immediate monitoring of stocks to theCHWs themselves. Additionally, mHealthhas the potential to improve the frequency
and quality of supervision and mentoring.
8
In view of this, mHealth has been incorpo-
rated into the field of healthcare in an
attempt to address the wide variety of chal-lenges facing low-income countries’ health
systems, such as skilled worker shortages; alack of timely reporting for surveillance and
diagnostics; poor treatment adherence; andpoor inventory and supply chain manage-
ment.
8 
Though iCCM has been shown to be an
effective strategy for improving access toeffective treatment, there are concernsCorrespondence: Godfrey Biemba, National
Health Research Authority, Paediatric Centreof Excellence, University Teaching Hospitals,Lusaka, Zambia.E-mail: gbiemba@gmail.com
Key words: iCCM, malaria, diarrhea, pneu-
monia, mHealth.
Acknowledgements: The study team would
like to acknowledge the following: UNICEFfor financial support; Dr. Charlotte MuhekiZikusooka and Cristabel Abewe of HealthNetConsult in Uganda for training the costingdata analysis team and developing the costingdata collection and analysis tool; the Ministryof Health at all levels for providing data andguidance. In particular, we sincerely thankhealth facility staff supervisors and CHWs fortheir cooperation and participation. 
Contributions: GB and DH conceptualized
and developed the study protocol for the clus-ter randomized controlled trial, including thecosting sub study. They were the Co-PrincipalInvestigators of the study. GB conceptualizedthe manuscript, contributed to the drafting ofthe main costing report and interpretation ofthe costing data; he drafted the first version ofthe manuscript. BC was the Project Directorfor the iCCM study. He worked with GB andthe team to plan and design the costing work,recruit and train data collectors and supervisedthe data collection. He read and providedinput into the manuscript. DH, KYA, UG, KL,and WML reviewed and had significant inputinto the manuscript. AM led the costing datacollection, analyzed the costing data and draft-ed the main costing report from which themanuscript was derived. He also reviewed themanuscript. All the authors approved the finalversion of the manuscript.
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
potential conflict of interest.
Funding: None.Received for publication: 30 January 2019.
Revision received: 22 August 2019.Accepted for publication: 17 October 2019.
This work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0License (CC BY-NC 4.0).
©Copyright: the Author(s), 2019
Licensee PAGEPress, ItalyJournal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039doi:10.4081/jphia.2019.1039
Non-commercial use only                                    [Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039]                                            [page 107]about the corresponding cost and added
value.9Accordingly, in a resource-constrai-
ned setting like Zambia, policy makers orplanners are increasingly challenged tojustify resource allocation in terms of costsand effects. Arising from this, a comprehen-sive understanding of iCCM costs using themHealth strategy will assist Zambia andother low-income countries that are consi-dering scaling up iCCM using a mHealthstrategy to advocate to donors and mini-stries of finance to allocate sufficient fundsfor this initiative.
10
We conducted a cost analysis within a
mHealth enhanced iCCM implementationtrial. This paper presents the total cost ofiCCM and the incremental costs of enhan-ced supervision and improved drug supplychain management on iCCM implementa-tion using the mHealth strategy. 
Trial registration: Study ID No.
4980/A0/04/001/010. ClinicalTrials.govIdentifier: NCT02866097
Materials and Methods
Study area 
This study was conducted in Chipata
and Chadiza Districts of Eastern Province,Zambia. In 2013, Chipata district had 42health facilities including 30 rural healthcenters, 7 health posts, 4 urban health cen-ters and 1 level two hospital while Chadizadistrict had 14 health facilities - 4 healthposts, 6 rural health centers, 2 zonal healthcenters, 1 urban health center and a firstlevel hospital. Data were collected from 40health facilities (20 iCCM intervention(mHealth) and 20 control sites).
Study design
The cost analysis was undertaken
immediately following the cluster randomi-zed controlled trial (cRCT) that evaluatedthe effectiveness of a mHealth strategy(intervention) in comparison to the Ministry
of Health (MoH) iCCM standard practice
(control). The results of the cRCT are yet to
be submitted for publication. A cluster wasdefined as a health facility, including all
CHWs in its catchment area that were pro-viding iCCM, and the children under 5years old with malaria, pneumonia, and
diarrhea that they had treated. The primary
outcome measure in the cRCT was the pro-
portion of children under five years appro-priately treated for malaria, diarrhea, and
pneumonia. All clusters sampled for thecRCT were also sampled for the costing
analysis.
The iCCM cRCT intervention 
Intervention CHWs were trained to usejava-enabled mobile feature phones, loaded
with the iCCM Community District HealthManagement Systems software version 2(C-DHIS2), Java 2 platform Micro Edition(J2ME) aggregator and trackerapplications.
11The aggregator application
was used to report weekly on disease case-load of malaria, diarrhea, and pneumoniaseen and referred by each CHW, and repor-ting on iCCM commodities using an elec-tronic Report and Requisition Form. Thetracker application was used by CHWs tosend advance messages to health centers forreferred patients, automated messages tohealth center staff reminding them to con-duct monthly mentorship and supervision,and submission of mentorship forms aftereach mentorship session. Health center staff(CHW supervisors) in the intervention armwere trained to use the C-DHIS2 to receivereports on disease caseloads, medical sup-plies reports and requisitions, referrals fromCHWs, providing feedback to CHWs oncases referred, and to use monthly automa-ted reminders to supervise and mentor. Thestudy was conducted in Chipata andChadiza districts in Eastern Province ofZambia. 
Data collection 
Data collection instruments comprised
three questionnaires that were administeredthrough face to face interviews at the districthealth office from the district iCCM coordi-nator; at the health facility from the iCCMCHW supervisor; and at the communitylevel from the iCCM trained CHWs.National level data were obtained from theMoH. Data collection instruments were pilottested and revised before administration inthis study. The data collection team includeda health economist, who acted as the teamleader, and six trained research assistants.These data collectors and supervisors weretrained before the pre-test and actual datacollection started. Data were collectedduring August-September 2016 from boththe iCCM intervention (mHealth) and con-
trol sites with a reference time period of 1
st
March 2016 – 31stAugust 2016. From both
the intervention and control sites, 40 health
facility supervisors and 75 communityhealth workers were interviewed.
Costing methods and perspectives
In order to calculate the cost of iCCM
treatment of malaria, pneumonia and
diarrhea in under five years, this study
applied the ingredients approach12and
adopted the provider’s perspective. This
included identification of all specific
resources used, quantifying them, and eva-luating them by attaching either financial
and/or economic costs. Data were collectedfor the baseline year 2016, including prices
of medicines, salaries and training. An ave-rage exchange rate of ZMW 10.408 per 1USD in 2016 (www.oanda.com) was usedfor all USD currency conversions. Allresearch associated costs were excluded. 
Recurrent costs 
Recurrent cost items included person-
nel, management, supervision, operating
and maintenance costs (e.g. transport and
maintenance of vehicles), overheads (such
as water, telephone and electricity), suppliesor commodities (such as notebooks, pens,storage bags, gum boots). Supervision costsincluded costs of staff based at the central,district and health facilities levels thatdirectly supervised the CHWs in the inter-vention and control sites. In order to com-pute supervision costs, the percentage timespent on iCCM supervision was allocated tothe staff total salary and any other benefitsreceived. Transport and vehicle maintenan-ce included the recurrent costs of mainte-nance for all the vehicles used in the iCCMprogram. For the vehicles shared with otherprograms, an estimate of the proportion ofthat vehicle’s usage was allocated to iCCM. 
Capital costs 
Vehicles, cell phones, bicycles and
respiratory acute respiratory infection
(ARI) timers were the only capital itemsthat were considered. The replacement costsof vehicles were obtained from car dealersin Zambia. Annual replacement costs forvehicles were based on their replacementvalue at 2016 market prices. Time preferen-ce was accounted for by discounting thecosts of capital items at a discount rate of 3percent.
13This is consistent with recom-
mendations from literature.14For vehicles,
an estimated life of five years was usedwhile for the cell phones, bicycles andrespiratory ARI timers an estimated usefullife of two years was applied.
Start-up costs
Start-up costs consisted of training,
mHealth software development and cost of
equipment (ARI timers, phone and bicycle).Training costs comprised of activities fortraining supervisors and CHWs on iCCM.For the intervention, the addition of themHealth strategy required extra training ofboth CHWs and supervisors in the use ofthe C-DHSIS2 mobile software. Trainingcost items were collected from the imple-menting organization, the Zambian Centrefor Applied Health Research andDevelopment Limited (ZCAHRD).mHealth software development costs com-prised of the cost of adapting DHIS2 into C-DHIS2.
                                                                                                                   Article
Non-commercial use onlyDealing with shared costs
For the computation of the shared
overhead costs, we used the proportion of
time spent on iCCM program for eachoverhead expenditure line. In order toobtain the allocation factor, we asked howmuch time vehicles for instance were usedfor iCCM or how much time was spent oniCCM. The allocation factor was thenapplied to the actual overhead expenditureline. For instance, on monthly rentals ofabout USD 6,666.60, 5% was allocated toiCCM and 2% was applied to utilities(water, electricity) out of the actual monthlyutility bills. 
Treatment costs
Treatment costs included costs of arte-
misinin-based combination therapy (ACTs),
amoxicillin, oral rehydration solution(ORS) and zinc supplements dispensed byCHWs for the treatment of children underfive years of age diagnosed with malaria,pneumonia and diarrhea. Drug quantitiesdispensed were collected from the CHWspatients’ registers. Prices of each medicinewere sourced from the MoH. 
Malaria diagnostic (RDTs) costs
To compute Malaria diagnostic costs,
total number of RDTs used which was
obtained from the CHWs patients’ registerswere multiplied by the unit price of RDT. Itshould be noted however that data on num-ber of RDTs used by the CHWs were some-times difficult to obtain due to poor recordkeeping. Poor record keeping in this caserefers to the observation noted on thediscrepancy of quantities issued by thehealth facilities and what was utilized bythe CHWs which may have resulted inunder reporting of malaria cases diagnosedand treated. Data entry and analysis 
Data entry began in September 2016,
five days after data collection commenced,
and continued concurrently with thefieldwork. This offered an advantage becau-se data were consistently quality checkedand feedback was given to field teams, the-reby improving data quality. All data werefirst captured on paper-based forms. Oncethese had been verified as complete andaccurate, they were transferred to the iCCMcosting Excel tool specifically developedfor this study. The costing excel tool auto-matically calculated the final costs byaggregating all the cost data by cost compo-nents (start-up/management costs, programcost, treatment costs). The excel tool alsocalculated the average unit cost per contactfor malaria, pneumonia and diarrhea.
Results
Study population
Table 1 summarizes the study popula-
tion consisting of 8-iCCM managementteam at national level, 2 iCCMCoordinators (1 from each of the two studydistricts), 75 CHWs (38 in intervention and37 in control sites) and 49 CHW supervisors(29 in intervention and 20 in control site).Incremental cost per cost centre by
study arm
Table 2 shows incremental cost per cost
centre by study arm as start-up, program,
and treatment; contributing 32%, 67%, and1% to the overall incremental cost betweenintervention and control arms of the study.Training cost contributed the highest to thestart-up costs and to the overall incrementalcost. Supportive supervision and supplychain management contributed the highestto the incremental costs associated withprogram costs at 36% and 27% of the totalincremental cost, respectively. Under super-vision, the major cost driver was personneltime at health facilities associated withsupervision of CHWs. While, the cost dri-vers of supply chain management was thecosts associated with personnel (pharmaci-st) at national level and the data bundlesprovided to the CHWs in the intervention.
Incremental cost (USD) by iCCM
disease by study arm 
An analysis of the cost data by iCCM
disease category shows that malaria diagno-
sis and treatment contributed the highestcost to the incremental cost of usingmHealth as an intervention to supportsupervision and supply chain management
                             Article
Table 1. Description of costing data collection study participants at Chipata and Chadiza
Districts, Zambia, 2016.
Participants                                                   Intervention           Control                     Total
National iCCM management team                                                                                                                      8
District iCCM coordinators                                                                                                                                 2
iCCM CHW supervisors                                                             29                               20                                    49
iCCM trained community health workers                             38                               37                                    75
Total                                                                                               67                               57                                   124
Table 2. Incremental cost per cost centre by study arm in USD, 2016t A016 USD.
Cost Centre                                                         Study Arm                   Total            Incremental          % Contribution to
                                                                                       Intervention      Control             cost                     cost               total incremental cost
Start-up costs         Training                                                                        92,533                   51,188                 143,721                        41,345                                        22
                                  Software development for mHealth                     20,000                        -                      20,000                         20,000                                        10
                                  Phones, ARI timers, bicycles                                    3,028                     2,227                    5,255                            801                                           0
                                  Subtotal                                                                      115,561                  53,415                 168,976                        62,146                                        32
Program costs        Program management                                                2,020                         -                       2,020                           2,020                                          1
                                  Supervision                                                                  88,340                   18,798                 107,138                        69,542                                        36
                                  Supply chain                                                                 52,231                     331                    52,562                         51,900                                        27
                                  Materials (umbrella, notebooks, registers, 
                                  gum boots, bags, torches)to CHWs                       1,869                     1,859                    3,728                             10                                            0
                                  Vehicles and transport                                              17,359                   14,018                  31,377                          3,341                                          2
                                  Personnel                                                                      5,859                     4,741                   10,600                          1,118                                          1
                                  Subtotal                                                                      167,678                  39,747                 207,425                       127,931                                       67
Treatment costs     Drugs and Supplies                                                     4,980                     3,331                    8,311                           1,649                                          1
Total costs                                                                                                      288,219                  96,493                 384,712                       191,726                                      100
[page 108]                                             [Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039]
Non-commercial use only                                    [Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039]                                            [page 109](Table 3). It cost USD 12.82, USD 10.37,
and USD 9.58 more to treat each case ofmalaria, pneumonia, and diarrhea respecti-vely with mHealth enhanced supportivesupervision and supply chain managementthan without mhealth. Overall, it cost USD11.35 more to treat each iCCM disease withmHealth enhancement than without.
Discussion 
The purpose of this iCCM cost analysis
study was to understand the cost implica-tions of providing improved iCCM byenhancing supervision, supply chain mana-gement and submission of electronic reportsusing mHealth strategy in two districts ofZambia. This analysis compares the costs ofiCCM using mHealth strategy to the currentMoH standard practice in public health faci-lities in the two study districts in Zambia.The cost estimates for the iCCM program inthese two districts represent an importantmilestone in obtaining a more comprehensi-ve and accurate reflection of total costs,incremental costs, and cost per iCCM con-dition. The analysis also calculated the pro-gram start-up costs amounting to USD168,976 which were not included in thecomputation of incremental cost per iCCMcondition. 
Higher costs for program and treatment
costs items in the intervention sites wereconstantly observed for each of the expen-diture line items compared to the controlsites with a resultant overall incrementalcost of USD 11.35 per iCCM condition.Within the program costs, highest costswere incurred in the supervision of CHWsby health facility personnel while in thetreatment costs, higher costs were incurredin the drugs and supplies expenditure lineitem. Further, it is worth noting that underprogram cost there is almost no change incosts for materials to CHWs between inter-vention and control arms. This is attributed
to the fact that the same materials (such asregisters, torch, bags, umbrella, boots andT/shirts) were given to CHWs in both the
interventions and control sites. On the otherhand, the high supervision costs in the inter-vention sites reflect the relatively greateramount of time spent by health facility staffon supervising CHWs working on iCCMactivities in the intervention than in the con-trol sites. The increase in the levels ofsupervision in the intervention was trigge-red by CHWs in the submission of electro-nic report and referrals. The interventionCHWs also attended to more iCCM casesthan those in the control. The higher incre-mental cost of drugs and supplies in treat-ment costs was attributed to the extra num-bers of cases of iCCM conditions seen andthe correspondingly larger quantities of themedicine and laboratory supplies consumedin the intervention. Within the interventionsites, confirmed malaria was the most costlyiCCM condition followed by diarrhea andpneumonia. A critical look at the drugs andsupplies and the number of cases seen asreflected in Tables 2 and 3 show that theintervention arm treated over 3000 morecases for an incremental cost ofUS1,649.00. It is difficult to fully explainhow this apparently small amount of incre-ment covered such a big increase in cases inthe intervention. The possible explanation isthat the intervention group had greatersupervision and mentorship and thereforeused drugs and supplies more efficiently,with less wastage.
We also observed a large incremental
cost in supply chain. This is attributed to theadditional cost of the mobile phones,software programming costs, the cost ofdata bundles, and the cost of training theCHWs and their supervisors. The overallincremental cost would reduce as the pro-gram is scaled up since some of these costsare one off costs. 
The total costs reported in this analysis
appear to be moderately high. However, itshould be noted that, while efforts weremade in our cost analysis methodology todiscount costs associated with research acti-vities; for example, staff costs by the inve-stigators, not all costs could easily bediscounted because they were intricately
associated with both research and program
implementation. A good example was the
cost associated with the time spent on theproject by the Project Director who coordi-nated both program and research activities.
This limitation could have over-estimatedthe costs. The incremental cost of USD11.35 per iCCM condition treated appearsto be fairly large. However, we were unableto find any literature on the incremental costof mHealth in iCCM and hence it may bedifficult to objectively say this figure is highor low since we do not have any regional ornational market figures to compare with. 
The cost per iCCM case treated ranged
from USD 19.53 to USD 16.97 for mHealthenhanced treatment of malaria and pneumo-nia, respectively, and from USD 9.08 toUSD 6.60 for non-mHealth enhanced treat-ment of diarrhea and pneumonia, respecti-vely. The figures for the cost of non-mHealth enhanced treatment of iCCM con-ditions are comparable to figures reportedin literature within the African region,reporting a cost range of USD 2.44 to 13.71per diarrhea case treated; USD 2.17 to USD17.54 per for malaria (excluding rapid dia-gnostic tests); USD 1.70 to USD 12.94 perpneumonia treated.
10We do note however
that, according to the analysis by Collins,the costs for Zambia in 2011 were USD3.60 and 3.56 per diarrhea and pneumoniatreatment, respectively. The differencebetween our analysis and Collins’ resultscould be due to changes in unit costs overtime. 
The overall costs of iCCM implementa-
tion should become lower in relative termsover time if the program is scaled up andachieves economies of scale. There are alsomore opportunities for minimizing costswhile maintaining good support for theCHWs so that the availability and quality ofsupervision of iCCM is maintained. Forinstance, costs can be reduced by integra-ting activities such as combining supervi-sion with outreach visits where extra curati-ve services are provided by the supervisorduring the visit or focusing on all commu-nity health services rather than just theiCCM program. 
Limitations
When interpreting the results of this
iCCM costing analysis, a number of metho-dological limitations should be considered.
                                                                                                                   Article
Table 3. Incremental cost in USD by iCCM disease by study arm, 2016.
iCCM cases                                            Intervention                                                                       Control                                   Incremental 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cost/Case
                                   Total # of Cases     Total Cost   Cost per Case           Total # of Cases       Total Cost   Cost per Case              Cost
Diarrhea                                           1,689                      31,514.90                 18.66                                     1,063                          9,648.00                   9.08                              9.58
Pneumonia                                        3,441                      58,390.10                 16.97                                     2,339                         15,439.00                  6.60                             10.37
Malaria (all confirmed)                 4,245                      82,889.71                 19.53                                     2,686                         18,026.00                  6.71                             12.82
Total                                                  9,375                     172,794.71                18.43                                     6,088                         43,113.00                  7.08                             11.35
Non-commercial use only[page 110]                                             [Journal of Public Health in Africa 2019; 10:1039]Personnel costs were estimated based on
level of effort (time) spent on iCCM programactivities as reported by the staff involved.These relied on respondents’ recall of theproportion of staff time devoted to the iCCMactivities. This could have resulted in over-or under-estimation of the actual costs. Inaddition, as noted under the discussion sec-tion, while efforts were made to separateresearch costs from purely iCCM implemen-tation costs, complete separation was notpossible. Hence, some of the costs includedin this analysis may have included researchcosts, leading to a possible over estimate ofthe costs. Notwithstanding these limitations,this analysis presents findings that at best layout to decision makers a rigorously estimatedcost of the iCCM program using mHealthstrategy.
Conclusions 
This cost analysis study of iCCM in
Chipata and Chadiza, rural districts ofZambia, has provided practical, applicableinformation on the costs associated withimplementing an iCCM program usingmHealth interventions. The study showsthat enhancing iCCM using mobile healthtechnology was associated with an incre-mental cost of USD 11.50 per child contact.Over two thirds of this cost was attributableto program costs; 36% of which was asso-ciated with supervision. If the program is tobe scaled up, the incremental cost per childcontact should become lower, as all costsassociated with research activities wouldnot be included. Further research is neededto evaluate the added long-term value ofmHealth interventions on the health outco-mes that iCCM addresses to determine theincremental cost-effectiveness of mHealthenhancements of iCCM.References
1.WHO (2011). Child mortality.
Millennium Development Goal (MDG).
Available from: http://www.who.int/pmnch/media/press_materials/fs/fs_mdg4_childmortality/en/
2.George A, Rodríguez DC, Rasanathan
K, et al. iCCM policy analysis:Strategic contributions to understandingits character, design and scale up in sub-Saharan Africa. Health Policy Plan2015;30,:ii3–ii11.
3.UNICEF (2015). Levels and trends in
child mortality. Report on estimatesdeveloped by the UN Inter-agencyGroup for Child Mortality Estimation.https://www.unicef.org/media/files/IGME_Report_Final2.pdf 
4.Zambia Demographic and Health
Survey (ZDHS) 2013-14, CentralStatistical Office (CSO), Ministry ofHealth (MOH) [Zambia], ICFInternational, Rockville, Maryland,USA: Central Statistical Office,Ministry of Health, and ICFInternational.
5.Nonvignon J, Chinbuah MA, Gyapong
M, et al. Is home management of feversa cost-effective way of reducing under-five mortality in Africa? The case of arural Ghanaian District. Trop Med IntHealth 2012;17:951-7.
6.Diaz T, Aboubaker S, Young M. Current
scientific evidence for integrated com-munity case management (iCCM) inAfrica: Findings from the iCCMEvidence Symposium. J Global Health2014;4:020101. 
7.Hamer DH, Marsh DR, Peterson S,
Pagnoni F. Integrated community casemanagement: next steps in addressingthe implementation research agenda.Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012;87:151-3.
8.Marshall C, Lewis D, Whittaker M .
mHealth technologies in developing
countries, 2013: a feasibility assessmentand a proposed framework. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264205169_Strengthening_health_sys-tems_in_mHealth_technologies_in_developing_countries_a_feasibility_assess-ment_and_a_proposed_frameworkAccessed: July 23, 2018.
9.Collins D, Jarrah Z, Gilmartin C, Saya
U. The costs of integrated communitycase management (iCCM) programs: Amulti-country analysis. J Global Health2014;4:020407.
10.Nefdt R, Ribaira E, Diallo K. Costing
commodity and human resource needsfor integrated community case manage-ment in the differing community healthstrategies of Ethiopia, Kenya andZambia. Ethiop Med J 2014;52:137–49.
11. Biemba G, Chiluba B, Yeboah-Antwi
K, et al. Mobile-Based CommunityHealth Management InformationSystem for Community Health Workersand Their Supervisors in 2 Districts ofZambia. Glob Health Sci Pract 2017;5:486-94.
12.Drummond FM, Sculpher JM, Torrance
WG, et al.. Methods for The EconomicEvaluation Of Health CareProgrammes, Oxford University Press.2005.
13.Drummond MF, Stoddart GL, Torrance
GW. Methods for Economic Evaluationof Health Care Programmes, 1997; 2nded, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
14.Walker D, Kumaranayake L. Allowing
for differential timing in cost analysesdiscounting and annualization. HealthPolicy Plann 2002;17:112-8.
                             Article
Non-commercial use only