* Corresponding author : fahlevi@stie -kusumanegara.ac.id  Cybercrime Business Digital in Indonesia  
Mochammad Fahlevi1,*, Mohamad Saparudin1, Sari Maemunah1, Dasih Irma1, and Muhamad Ekhsan2 
1Department of Management , Faculty of Economic s, School of Business Kusuma Negara , Jakarta  - Indonesia  
2Department of Manage ment , Faculty of Economics, School of Business Pelita Bangsa , Cikarang  - Indonesia  
Abstract.  The development of information technology and especially internet communication has caused 
significant social, economic and cultural changes to occur so quickly. O n one side of information 
technology can provide benefits, simplify and accelerate access to information that we need in all things and 
can change the model of the economy and business models. However, even a negative impact cannot be 
avoided. Along with t he development of internet technology, causing the emergence of new crimes called 
new cybercrime through the internet network. In this study, the authors approached qualitatively with 
interview methods and supported descriptive data from research sources o riginating from regulators and 
current digital business people who aimed to find out cy bercrime in Indonesia. The results of this study, 
both regulators and business people view that critical preventive measures are taken and the law must 
continue to follo w the development of crime in the cyber world . 
Keywords : Cybercrime; Fraud; Business; Digital; Law . 
1 Introduction   
The emergence of worldwide webs has facilitated the 
production of infrastructure, which is highly developed 
in the business strategy and op erations, due to its 
contribution to the advancement of businesses in 
business, thus becoming the primary media for trade and 
industry development in certain countries and the world 
at large [1]. 
Digital technology development has cau sed the 
majority of th e world's population to get access to the 
internet, more than four billion people online and 42% 
population on social media. 9 out of 10 of all people on 
social media do not have the chance always to be mobile 
officials [2]. In addition to access to social  media, the e -
commerce market is also growing. In January 2015, 28% 
of the time was spent online on various social media 
platforms [2]. 
The development of technological information and 
the particularity of internet communication has caused 
significant soci al, economic and cultural changes to 
work quickly. The system can collect, store, process, 
produce and disseminate information to the public 
effectively and quickly. Technology is also becoming an 
alternative, espec ially for social implementation. The 
current technology is "weapon", in addition to being able 
to contribute to improving well -being, progress, human 
development, such as being valid ways of doing evil. In 
the dimension of the virtual world, activities are  
challenging to limit due to very cheap a nd easily 
accessible technology from any part of the world. As a 
result, all people can commit crimes either from the internet or other people who have not connected with 
those involved.  
Digital development is curr ently fast, like access, that 
is easier an d more affordable to the Internet [3]. Argue 
that a continuously developing Internet has led to 
changes in the workforce market and uses marketing 
strategies. Research has previously stated tha t traditional 
markets, such as television, magazines, and radio , where 
companies try to increase sales are considered to be 
unstable [3, 4]. Traditional marketers are considered late 
since the internet has change d the market and has lost 
effectiveness [4]. 
According to 2016 survey data released by the 
Indonesian Intern et Network Organizing Association 
(APJII)  [5], 132.7 million Indonesian people have been 
connected to the internet. It was state d that internet 
media users in Indonesia continued to increase every 
year. Ease of access to the internet and easy access to 
internet devices that make the growth of Indonesian 
internet users increase. Indonesian internet users 70 per 
cent of internet user s access the internet from mobile 
devices or mobile gadgets. This shows that the use of 
mobile internet is quite high, while the  use of home 
internet is quite low.  
Besides, the article states that most Indonesian 
internet users use the internet to access socia l media and 
entertainment. Facebook became the destination of most 
Indonesian internet users and followed by Instagram. 
Indonesian internet users start providing secure online 
transactions, using ATMs to transact. Primary goods and 
services that elimi nate online stores such as household 
equipment and tickets. The user recognizes that the 
internet is not part of the child and th at the government        , (201 https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201 E3S Web of Conferences125 9) 9125
ICENIS 201902101 21001
   © The  Authors,  published  by EDP  Sciences.  This  is an open  access  article  distributed  under  the terms  of the Creative Commons Attribution  License  4.0
 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).  
must increase the strategy in harmful and immoral 
affairs.  
Still from the APJII survey mentioning that the 
geograp hical usage of technology information, Pulau 
Java still dominates Indonesia's internet penetration 
followed by Sumatra and E astern Indonesia in the last 
position. Users are based on age, ages 10 -14 years of 
penetration 100 per cent, while those over 50 yea rs 
become the lowest. Based on work, students / private 
sector workers/health workers record the highest level of 
users, whi le entertaining households/workers/ SMEs is 
the lowest.  
The status of information technology can provide 
benefits, simplify and acce lerate information access that 
is impacted in severe ways that can change the model of 
the economy and business models. Howe ver, the 
negative impact also cannot be avoided. Along with the 
development of internet technology, causing new crimes 
to em erge is called new cybercrime through the internet 
network.  
In Indonesia internet users are overgrowing, based on 
data from APJII (I ndonesian Internet Service Provider 
Association) in 2017 . The number of Internet users in 
Indonesia in 2017 is 13 2.7 million  users or  around 51.5 
per cent of the total population of Indonesia at 256.2 
million. This is the most crucial part of Indonesia's 
population using this internet technology. Where 65 per 
cent of the Java islands or around 86.3 million people 
and the lowest  in Maluk u and Papua are 2.5 per cent, 
around 3.3 million people. From the results of the APJII 
survey, it was seen the spread of int ernet users that 
almost entirely affected all regions in Indonesia. This 
trend is sufficiently proud because the community 
service h as been able to enjoy developing technology 
information to be used in life every day . 
 
 
Fig. 1. Data on Internet Users in I ndonesia in 2017  
2 Literature Review   
2.1. Cyber Space   
Cyberspace  is an electronic media in a co mputer network 
that is widely used  for communication purposes in the 
online marketplace (directly connected). The major 
world is an integration of various com munication 
technologies and networks of computers (sensors, 
transducers, connections, transmission s, processors, signals, controller s) that can connect communication 
equipment (computers, handphones, electronic devices) 
that are spread all over the world a ctively.  
 Cyberspace can also be interpreted as an Imaginary 
Location (where the electronic activ ity is carried out) 
and also become s a virtual mass formed through steep 
communication in an interconnected computer network.  
 Cybercrime is a crime carried ou t in cyberspace using 
the computer and technological networks provided by 
Information and Communi cation infrastructure. Chawki  
[6] A visible trend has shown that upbringing of small -
scale businesses can increase the value of new 
challenges posed by cybercr ime against welfare for user 
categories on the internet . According to Jaishankar [7], 
Cyber crime is now outside the borders and  countries that 
have no or no legislation regarding criminals are 
increasingly becoming increasingly vulnerable to 
attack s. 
2.2 Cyber Crime  
Definitions of type and classification of crimes are often 
different between co untries and states. The Cambridge  
dictionary defines Maya World Crime as Crime s 
committed by using computers or that relate to 
computers, primarily via the internet.  
 Universally, cybercrime is understood as "a lawless 
act in which a computer is a tool or target or both".  
 Cybercrime  is based  on conventional crime as well as 
a crime; crime and damage in electronic media and from 
now on the requirements for more equipm ent are 
generally regulated under the provisions of the 
Information Technology Law. The re ad element of 
internet crime is that t he danger of the alarm at the time 
of causing the computer to perform a function is that the 
access is intended to be secured. D o not close the 
possibility that the user can be classified in more than the 
category belo w, or even be supported or support 
conventional crime.  
a) Computer, System, and Network as Weapon  
b) Computer systems and networks as the main ones 
that result in the emerg ence of individuals, groups, 
and agencies.  
c) Computer, System, and Network as Target  
d) Comp uters, systems, and networks as targets t hat 
are attacked often result in problems with 
individuals, groups, and agencies . 
2.3 Cyber Related Crime   
The evil that is rel ated to the virtual world or the dead 
can happen outside the network. Cyber -related Cri me: 
a) Cyber Exacerbated (worsens)  
The purp ose of exacerbating textures is that someone 
who uses the internet network for his crime will 
exacerbate the risk of crime and n ot use the internet 
network. For example, pornography.  
b) Cyber Assisted (help)  
Help in the proxy file for the reverse story, whic h uses 
the internet network to help with the crime carried out 
outside the internet. Like eighth tax.         , (201 https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201 E3S Web of Conferences125 9) 9125
ICENIS 201902101 21001
2 
 Examples of Cyber Related  Crime crimes include; 
piracy of works/infringements, plagiarism, spreads of 
downloadi ng, such as software or films, illegal con tent: 
contradictory content, pornography, hoax content, 
controversy, sexual harassment, sales of illegal goods 
(prostitution, dr ugs). According to Jonathan Roseno in 
Cyberlaw, the law of internet reminds of the sco pe of the 
violation of law in networks, am ong others:  
1. Copyright . 
2. Trademark.  
3. Defamation.  
4. Defamation, Defamation, Humiliation (Hate Speech).  
5. Attack on compu ters (Hacking, Viruses, and Illegal  
Access).  
6. External resource management , such as IP -Address, 
domain name.  
7. Comfort Individual  (Privacy).  
8. Issues of Procedural . 
2.4 Fraud  
Accounting, known as two types of errors and errors. 
The difference between the two types of errors is 
distinguishe d by a fragile gap, that is, or at least a 
deliberate element. Even if it is known that it o ften 
detects more errors, it is difficult to compare with errors 
while management or work will try to hide  it. 
 "Fraud is a lack of action, which is done in the sam e 
way, so that it appears to be alone / group or 
disadvantages other parties (individuals, c ompanies or 
institutions)."  
 Many things encourage the occurrence of a fraud 
attempt, which is the cause that causes someone to 
commit fraud (pressure), the opportu nity that allows 
fraud to occur (opportunity), and the essential element in 
the occurrence o f fraud, wherever the search for 
justification (rationalization).  
 Types of fraud based on group violati ons become:  
a. Employee frau d (fraud), is a fraud committed 
by employees in an organization that works.  
b. Management fraud (fraud), is a fraud committed 
by the management by using the financial report 
or the transaction of the funds for various types 
of fraud, usually carried out to re duce 
stakeholders' involvement in t he organization . 
2.5 E-Commerce  
 Digital business is a business that has the presence 
(prese nce) on the internet.  "Today, every business is a 
digital business.  "The world is changing around us, an d 
Information and Communi cation Technologies (ICT) are 
drivi ng a significant part of this metamorphosis." - 
Accenture at Forbes . 
 A wave of digital busi ness or various technology 
technologies has given birth to the phenomenon of 
business in the face of inte lligent and creative 
intellectual capital. The internet era  has made many 
activities/businesses related to internet developing. At 
present, many entrep reneurs, business professionals, 
academics and institutions are investors and investors who have and will  engage in activities/bu sinesses that 
are related to the in ternet. However, it is marginalized, 
supported by the government in the field of Information  
Technology also relatively weak. Infrastructure 
electronics and communications are very minimal, and 
even if they are, the sales  value is still costly, so it is 
sometimes memorable as exclusive [8]. 
  In the division of the digital business that relies on 
the internet in the modern world when digital media is 
divided into two forms, namely plat forms and non -
platform s. 
3 Methodology  
The qualitative rese arch method is a method for 
investigating subjects that cannot be measured in terms 
of numbe rs or other measures of nature. Qualitative 
research can also be interpreted as a syllabic that is 
descri ptive and tends to use analysis with i nductive 
approaches. Sugiyono [9] describes qualitative research 
as the naturalistic research method because o f his 
research on natural conditions.  
It can be interpreted that in carrying out qualitative 
research all  the research objects are examined for wh at is 
manipulation  or the setting so that the various conditions 
of the research objects are useful before, wh ile, and after 
the research is relatively unchanged.  
Qualitative research is a type of study that resul ts in 
discoveries that cannot be obtained u sing procedural 
procedure statistics or the use of quantification. Through 
research, qualitative researchers c an recognize subjects 
and feel what they experience in daily life. According to 
qualitative research, d efinitions produce descriptive data 
so that  they are the deta ils of the phenomenon under 
study.  
According to Indriantoro and Supomo [10], the 
objective s of this study are to explain the relevant 
aspects of observed phenomena. The study of 
collaborative r esearch to  explain the characteristics of 
the subjects under study, examine various aspects of 
specific phenomena, and offer the idea of problems for 
further testing or research.  
 If the study of exploration is intended to understand 
the characteristics of  phenomena or problems studied, 
this research  is intended to explain the characteristics of 
phenomena or problems that exist . 
Table 1. Informant . 
Informa nt Status  
Bima Laga  Chair of the Digital Economy 
Division  
Muhammad  Salahudien 
Manggalany  2018 Data Ce nter and Cyber 
Security Expert  
Irjen Pol. Dr s. Dharma 
Pongre nkun MM, MH.  Deputy for National Cyber and 
Password Codes Identification 
and Detection  
Brigjend Pol Rachmad 
Wibowo SIK  Director of Cyber Crime  
        , (201 https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201 E3S Web of Conferences125 9) 9125
ICENIS 201902101 21001
3 
Descriptive research describes the characteristic s of a 
phenomenon that can be used as a basis  for making 
decisions to solve business problems. This research, 
although not intended to solve business pro blems, is also 
called a diagnosis of analysis whose data can be 
qualitative data or quantitative. Data collection is always 
researched; however, som etimes it is als o intended to 
test the hypothesis of the research questions.  
Based on the opinion of Karwono  and Martadiredja 
[11],  Definitions of research and descriptive analysis are 
examples to describe the  characteristics/symptoms/ 
functions of the pop ulation.  
Accord ing to Sugiyono [9], the understanding of the 
research method is as follows:  
"The researc h method can be interpreted as scientific 
means to obtain valid data with a goal that can be found, 
developed, and proven, a sense of interest so that i n turn 
it ca n be used to understand, solve and anticipate 
problems".  
4 Result  
Based on previous studies,  it was found that cybercrime 
is a global problem. Some developed countries that have 
large companies in the world -class, especially the E -
Commerce comp anies, become the world's largest crime 
market.  
In advanced countries, cybercrime attacks are more 
likely to be compared to developing countries, so that 
many countries issue illegal legislation as a preventive 
step. The resolution of the cluster security in digital 
business is carried out very serious ly and cautious 
because cybercrime causes a real loss to the comp any. 
The opinions of cybercrime crimes in the online 
world are also extensive, so most threats to business e -
commerce have a high risk of custom er data to the theft 
of account data and paymen ts from customers . 
 
Fig. 2. Annual Revenues  
4.1 BSSN  
The BSSN drafted the Indonesian Security Strategy as a 
reference for all the stakeholders in national security in 
developing and developing security polici es in their 
respective institutions. National  security strategies are 
arranged in harmony with the nat ure of n ational and state 
life, namely: Sovereignty, Independence, Security, 
Togetherness, and Adaptiveness.  The Government through Presidential Regulatio n 
Number 53 of 2017 concerning the State Cybe r and 
Code Body (BSSN) and its amendments. Presidential 
Regulatio n Number 133 of 2017 forms the BSSN, which 
is tasked with carrying out effective and efficient 
security by utilizing, developing and consolidating  all 
related elements with national security.  
Strategic Goals  Security Strategy for Indonesia is to 
provide security, public security, enforcement of 
security, social security and security for the digital 
economy. The Security Strategy Indonesian  information 
is expected to be one of the wo rld’s trust conditions for 
Indonesia in various internationa l securi ty forums. The 
Strategy of Security Indonesia is the contribution of the 
Indonesian nation in pushing for the creation of world 
peace.  
4.2 Id-SIRTII  / CC 
The idea of establishing  Id-SIRTII / CC (Indonesian 
Security Incident Response Team  on the Internet 
Infrastructure / Coordination Center) was initially 
delivered by several practitioners, industry, academia, 
community information techno logy and government in 
2005. ID -SIRTII / CC has the main task of doing 
socialization with stakeholders about IT  Security, 
carrying out monitoring, detection, warning of threats to 
network security from foreign countries. Specifically in 
the act of securing  the utilization of the network, 
creating/ru nning/ developing and log file databases and 
internet secur ity stat istics in Indonesia.  
The security of the system information can cause 
threats, disturbances, and attacks. The book cannot be a 
complication, such  as causing a loss of economy to the 
high l evel of service for users. For example, the loss of 
internet  resourc es in Indonesia has only resulted in a 
collection of information packages that were sent by 
parties who were not responsible.  
Id-SIRTII / CC also  has a supporting agency in law 
enforcemen t specifically for crimes that utilize 
information technology . Especi ally in the presentation of 
electronic devices, Id -SIRTII / CC has the facilities, 
expertise, and procedures to carry out an analysis so that 
it can make the material of the material bein g legalized. 
In a series of investigations, ID -SIRTII / CC ha s a 
centralized in giving information on statistics and 
patterns (incidents) in Indonesian internet traffic.  
4.3 Directorate General of POLRI  
At the Nati onal Police Headquarters, the handling of  
crimes is in the Directorate of Special Economic Crimes 
(DIT  TIPPID EKSUS) in the Directorate V which deals 
with other acts of crime related to criminal defen se, 
information and electronic transaction transactions.  The 
Directorate of Criminal Investigatio n, specifically the 
Metro Jaya Regional Police, is tasked wit h conduc ting 
investigations and investigating specific actions, 
especially for investigations related to information 
technology, telecommunications, and e lectronic 
transactions.         , (201 https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201 E3S Web of Conferences125 9) 9125
ICENIS 201902101 21001
4 
By revealing cr iminal cases that continue to increase 
from time to time, the M etro Jay a Regional Police Unit 
appears to be perfecting the disclosure of cybercrime and 
computers.  
With a new model of business activities, e.g. 
banking,  banking, which depend on electronic me dia, the 
internet is like the black for cybercriminals. Moving 
companie s are looking for happy online businesses with 
their growth and on the other side, concerns security. All 
information and money are threatened by cybercrime.  
The e -commerce industry is  different in terms of 
operationalism and has a unique and risky  challen ge 
because no physical presence increases the likelihood of 
fraud and crime. There are many reasons in Indonesia for 
e-commerce credit that is not  controlled. The cost of 
cybercrime wi ll continue to increase more and more 
functions of businesses mo ving onl ine and when 
consumers and organizations around the world gather in 
cyberspace. The risk of intellectual wealth theft is 
increasing, which results  in a product with the use of 
technolo gy thieves leading to enormous losses for 
companies that are les s risky of innovation returns. The 
government must take the initiative seriously to attack 
the challenges of cybercrime if not, technology will have 
an ad verse impact on business . 
As ideal as President Joko Widodo, Indonesia wants 
to have more people in In donesia.  The Ministry of 
Communication and Information, as the presidential 
assistant also continues to turn MSMEs to have a profile 
on the internet world . 
According to Mr Manggalan, from Id -SIRTII, there 
has been an interview with the researcher who is aw are 
of the threat of cybercrime in E -Commerce companies 
and the establishment of cybersecurity systems by e -
Commerce businesses, especially for the platfo rm. 
One more is the establishment of  the dispute team. 
This is good for platforms and non -platforms. L arge 
startups such as  Traveloka are one of the most numerous 
for supervisors.  
The Dispute team has the means to provide a 
misunderstanding. Stake up partn ers have an anti -fraud 
division that  can decide whether it is fraud or not. For 
non-platform digital b usinesse s, such as marketing 
services, social media online shops and others that have 
profiles, opportunities for threats and threats. Besides, 
the loss w ill be paid for in the household or equity.   
5 Conclusion  
Cybercrime is a  threat to the world that ca n cause a loss 
of life in an ever -increasing attack, which can cause 
minimal losses. Digital business growth in Indonesia is 
mainly E -Commerce, along with  the crisis in the digital 
world tha t can affect digital business in Indonesia. The 
total loss caused by crime  each year reaches $ 1.5 
Trillion.  
Serious government to develop in Indonesia for the 
government to prepare the necessary devices such as ITE 
issues, regulations needed, and related  institutions.  
Steering related to a digital business must:  Knowing  
4 Acts - As follows:  First, Government Regulation No. 82 of 2012 
concerning the Implementation of Electronic Systems 
and Transactions.  Second, Law No. 19  of 2016 
Amendment to Act No. 11 of  2008 concerning 
Electronic Information and Transactions.  Third, Pe rmen  
Kom info No. 10 of 2015 concerning Procedures for 
Registration of Electronic Systems in the State 
Administration.  Fourth, PermenKominfo No. 7 of 2018  
Performing management mapping can u se the BSSN 
index  and i mplementation of Standards, ISO 270001, 
IDSS , and OS O. 
Enforcement of law against criminals is still very 
minimal, making cybercrime free in Indonesia, the 
problem of regulating and existing laws in  Indonesia 
must continue to be like  the other developing countries 
which are inventive steps from crim inals wh o can find 
current digital business . 
References  
1. S.U. Guan,  S.L. Tan, F.A. Hua, modularized 
electronic payment system for agent -based e -
comm erce. Journal of Research and Practice in 
Information Technology,  36(2), 67 (2004)  
2. S. Kemp, Digital in 2018: World’s internet us ers 
pass the 4 billion mark , We are social , 30 (2018)  
3. Tiago , Verisimo , Digital Marketing and Social 
media: Why bother? . Busin ess Horizons, 57(6), 703 -
708 (2014)  
4. A. Opreana, S. Vinerean, A new development in 
online marketing: Introducing digital inbo und 
marketing . Expert Jou rnal of Marketing,  3(1) (2015)  
5. A.P.J. I. Indonesia, Infografis Penetrasi dan Perilaku 
Pengguna Inter net Indonesia . ID: APJII  (2017)  
6. M. Chawki, Nigeria tackles advance fee 
fraud . Journal of information, Law and 
Technology,  1(1), 1-20 (2009)  
7. K. Jaishankar, Sexting: A new form of Victimless 
Crime? . International Journ al of Cyber 
Criminology,  3(1), 21 (2009)  
8. C.W. Widhianto, E–Business: Teknologi dan 
Peluang Bisnis di Indonesia . The Winners,  3(1), 19-
31 (2002)  
9. Sugiyono , Metode Peneli tian Manajemen . Bandung: 
Alfab eta, CV (2013)  
10. N. Indriantoro , B. Supomo, Metode Penelitian 
Bisnis . Yogyakarta: BPFE (2002)  
11. J. Sarwono, T. Martadiredja, Riset bisnis untuk 
pengambilan keputusan . Yogyakarta: CV Andi 
Offset  (2008)  
        , (201 https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201 E3S Web of Conferences125 9) 9125
ICENIS 201902101 21001
5