Policy Research Working Paper 9135
Cyber Resilience of Autonomous Mobility Systems
Cyber Attacks and Resilience-Enhancing Strategies
Bo Zou
Pooria Choobchian
Julie Rozenberg
Sustainable Development
Office of Chief Economist 
January 2020
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedProduced by the Research Support TeamAbstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.Policy Research Working Paper 9135
The increasing cyber connectivity of vehicles and between 
vehicles and infrastructure will drastically reshape mobility 
in the coming decades. Although the advent of connected 
mobility is expected to benefit travelers and society by 
smoothing traffic, improving rider convenience, and 
reducing accidents, the augmented cyber components in 
connected and autonomous vehicles and related infrastruc -
ture also give rise to cyber attacks on the transportation 
system. Yet, little attention has been paid to transportation 
cyber resilience. This paper thus proposes an investigation 
on this topic with a comprehensive literature review. Cyber 
components and plausible autonomous mobility systems 
operation scenarios are discussed, before identifying possible cyber attacks to autonomous mobility systems at the vehicle 
and system levels. The discussion then moves to existing 
practices to enhance cybersecurity, and several strategies 
are investigated toward enhancing autonomous mobility 
system cyber resilience. At the vehicle level, creating layers 
and separation to reduce cyber component connectivity 
and deploying an independent procedure for data collec -
tion and processing are important in vehicle design and 
manufacturing. At the system level, recommended strate -
gies include keeping redundancy in transportation capacity, 
maintaining a separate road network, and deploying differ -
ent sub-autonomous mobility systems. 
This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Sustainable Development, and was funded by the Korean 
Green Growth T rust Fund. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make 
a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on 
the Web at http://www.worldbank.org/prwp. The authors may be contacted at jrozenberg@worldbank.org. Cyber Resilience of Autonomous Mobility Systems:  
Cyber Attacks and Resilien ce-Enhancing Strategies 
Bo Zou(1), Pooria Choobchian(1), Julie Rozenberg(2) 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, (2)World Bank
JEL: R42 R
48 
Keywords: autonomous mobility systems; cyber resilience; cyber attacks; vehicle- and system-level 
strategies  2 
 1 Introduction 
The objective of this paper is to understand the cy ber resilience of transportation systems, with a 
focus on future autonomous mobility. Cyber resilience is becoming a prominent issue in transportation 
as an increasing number of vehicles are Internet—and more generally cyber—connected. Taking the 
United States as an example, currently about 50 million vehicles or 20% of all vehicles on the road 
have Internet connectivity. All major car manufacturers have been committed to adding more 
connectivity features to their upcoming models. As  a result, it is estimated that about 17 million new 
“connected cars” will be added to the US roads each year (Consumer Watchdog, 2019). These vehicles 
will be interconnected through not only cyber components in the vehicles, but also the associated 
infrastructure.  
While the increased cyber connectivity is expected to enhance vehicle control, communication, 
and diagnostic functions, which contribute to improved vehicle- and system-level functioning and mobility management, cyber connectivity also exposes vehicles and the mobility system to significant 
risks of cyber attacks. Yet, little is known about what can be done to prepare the increasingly cyber 
connected vehicles and the mobility system for poten tial cyber attacks. Anticipating the growing trend 
of vehicle cyber connectivity and the eventual dom inance of autonomous vehicles—which will be even 
more cyber connected—in the future mobility environment, this paper takes a forward-looking view by focusing on ways to enhance the cyber resilience of autonomous mobility systems (AMS). Various 
types of cyber attacks on AMS will be investigated and strategies to enhance AMS cyber resilience 
will be explored. Given the interdisciplinary nature of transportation cyber resilience, our investigation 
and exploration are based on a comprehensive, multifaceted literature review through journal articles 
and technical reports from disciplines including transportation engineering, computer science, electrical engineering, systems engineering, urban planning, and public policy. The review and 
subsequent analysis provide the building blocks for understanding the current practices and prospective 
strategies for AMS cyber resilience enhancement.  
It is worth highlighting that although the focus of the paper is on AMS, many of the findings can 
inform enhancing the cyber resilience of today’s transportation systems given the common feature of cyber connectivity. In fact, as AMS is yet to be deployed, many discussions in the paper draw insights 
from research and experimentation on today’s connected vehicles and transportation systems. In the 
ensuing section, we first discuss the cyber compone nts in AMS and plausible AMS operation scenarios. 
Understanding the AMS operation scenarios is a prem ise besides understanding cyber attacks to design 
effective measures to enhance AMS cyber resilience. A variety of plausible types of cyber attacks, at 3 
 both the vehicle and system levels, are explored in the context of AMS in Section 3. In view of the 
AMS cyber components, operations scenarios, and cyber attack types, Section 4 is dedicated to the 
concept of cyber resilience in the context of AMS, a nd practices and possible strategies to enhance 
AMS resilience. A summary is given in Section 5. 
 
2 Future autonomous mobility systems 
2.1 Cyber components in an  autonomous vehicle 
In autonomous mobility systems, self-driving vehicles are smart enough to constantly make 
routing and navigating decisions in a physical road network given existing/predicted vehicular traffic 
streams. The routing and navigating capability of AVs depends critically on the cyber components and 
their interactions with the physical parts of AVs and associated infrastructure. Indeed, it is the cyber 
components and the cyber-physical interactions, which are much more complex than in today’s 
vehicles and transportation systems, that disti nguish AMS from today’s transportation systems.  
The cyber components and functions are embedded in the sensors and network connectivities of 
AVs. Fig. 1 illustrates the different sensing technol ogies that will be essential for information collection 
and the sense-and-avoidance capability of an AV. Dedicated short-range communication further 
enables vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrast ructure communications for sending and receiving 
critical data such as road condition, congestion, cr ashes, and possible rerouting. Dedicated short-range 
communication also enables platooning, i.e., a train of AVs that travel together collectively. The information collected will be processed through a cen tral onboard computing unit that outputs routing 
and navigating decisions. However, all these cybe r components and functions are subject to cyber 
attacks. 
 
 
4 
 Fig. 1.  Sensors and other technologies in a future AV  
(source: Center for Sustainable Systems, 2018). 
 
2.2 Plausible AMS operation scenarios 
Since AVs in an AMS do not rely on human drivers, future mobility would look quite differently 
from what it is today. While research on future transportation with AVs has been booming, a consensus 
has not been achieved on the exact operation scenario of future transportation systems. Three plausible 
scenarios have attracted most attention: 
 Autonomous mobility with private ownership:  In this scenario, most vehicles running on the 
street will be driverless and owned by indi vidual households. The possibility of household 
members coordinating schedules so that a single AV can accommodate their daily activities 
has been investigated. Relevant research has been further extended to looking into AVs co-
ownership by residents in a neighborhood or a community, which can reduce the ownership 
cost of each individual and increase use flexibility. 
 Shared autonomous mobility:  The second scenario also conceives a world dominated by AVs. 
However, these AVs will be assets of large fl eet operators such as a driverless version of 
future transportation network companies such as Uber and Lyft. Given that all major auto manufacturers nowadays are partnering with AV technology companies and/or developing 
AVs independently, it is possible that auto manufacturers may also become AV mobility 
service providers.  
 A mixed private and shared autonomous mobility  with coexistence of human-driven vehicles:  
This may be the most plausible scenario considering the long transition time from today to a 
complete self-driving environment, which may take at least a few decades (Fig. 2). A mix of 
traffic will persist on the road, including priv ately owned human-driven vehicles, shared 
human-driven vehicles, privately owned AVs, and shared AVs (see Fig. 3, which forecasts 
the total miles driven in the United States). The coexistence of the four types of vehicles would 
make traffic control very complex and  challenging for modeling and analysis (Noruzoliaee 
and Zou, 2019). 
Note that most transportation systems of today have car and non-car modes. The coexistence of 
different modes is also expected to persist in th e foreseeable future. Public transportation is an 
important non-car mode in helping mitigate traffic congestion, energy use, and emissions. In a future 
AMS, alternative modes other than AVs, especially those that could be immune to cyber attacks, would 5 
 be necessary to offer transportation capacity when the AMS is affected by cyber attacks. Joint 
considerations of AMS and alternative modes will therefore have important implications for enhancing 
AMS cyber resilience. This will be discussed in Section 4.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  AV sales, travel, and fleet projections (source: Litman, 2018). 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Projection of annual vehicle miles traveled by different vehicle types: 2015-2040 
(source: Deloitte, 2016). 
6 
  
3 Cyber attacks in the context of AMS 
A cyber attack is a malicious and deliberate attempt by an individual or organization to breach the 
information system of another individual or organiza tion (Cisco, 2019). In the context of AMS, the 
breaching of the information system of AMS, which in cludes individual cyber devices, infrastructure, 
and networks for sensing, computing, and communication, is usually aimed at compromising key 
functions of the system for the benefits of the attackers. Cyber attacks will cause harmful consequences to jeopardize the operational efficiency, safety, and privacy of AMS.  
Breaching of the AMS information system is real ized by cyber attackers successfully exploiting 
cyber vulnerabilities of AMS, which exist at both individual vehicle and system levels. At the vehicle 
level, cyber vulnerabilities arise due to a signifi cant number of interfaces a nd communication networks 
in AVs as compared to conventional vehicles, whic h allow for greater exposure of AVs to the external 
environment. At the system level, cyber vulnerabilities can result from: 1) inadequate schemes for data 
access control between AMS and the external environment as well as within AMS; 2) lack of 
coordination among cyber component providers and AV manufacturers; and 3) AMS developers and 
mobility service providers not paying enough atten tion to cybersecurity issues. The relationship 
between cyber attacks, cyber vulnerabilities, and th e harmful consequences of the cyber attacks is 
shown in Fig. 4.   
 
 
Fig. 4.  Cyber attacks, vulnerabilities, and harmful consequences of cyber attacks. 
 
7 
 Many types of cyber attacks are relevant to AMS. We classify a range of plausible cyber-attacks 
on AMS based on two criteria. The first criterion is wh ether an attack is more likely for a single AV 
or for a system. Vehicle-level attacks target functions and devices such as the camera, radar 
instruments, and internal communication within an AV. By contrast, system-level attacks aim at the 
sensing, control, and communication infrastructure (e .g., road sensors, traffic lights, and wireless 
Internet servers) that serves AVs in an area or a type(s) of AVs. Note that aggregating vehicle-level 
attacks does not necessarily make up a system-level threat because the points of vehicle-level attacks 
are individual AVs, whereas the points of syst em-level attacks are not individual AVs but the 
infrastructure that supports operations and communications of AVs.  
The second criterion for cyber attack classification is whether an attack is active or passive. An 
active cyber attack is highly malicious, aggressive, and blatant, attempting to negatively alter the communications and/or operations of AVs. AMS operat or(s) will be able to detect once the attack is 
successful and react immediately. By contrast, a passive cyber attack employs non-disruptive and 
covert methods. As a result, there is no immediate harmful consequence in altering AMS 
communications and operations. Passive cyber attacks are often about gathering AV 
operation/communication data and less likely to draw attention from AMS operators.  
Below we provide brief descriptions of different plausible cyber attacks to AMS. 
3.1 Vehicle-level attacks 
Gaining steering control of an AV (active attack):  Under this attack, an a ttacker will fully control 
the motion of an AV toward damaging consequences, for example, by stroking the brake-pedal 
suddenly or turning the steering wheel of the vehicle to cause crashes. Such malicious attacks, aiming 
at passenger injury or death, impose very serious sa fety concerns for AMS. Gaining steering control 
of an AV can be realized through masquerade attacks (Yagdereli et al., 2015). 
Deactivating sensors of an AV (active attack):  This type of attack compromises only the sensor 
components of a vehicle. Nonetheless, the potentia l harm could still be considerable. For example, 
deactivating sensors responsible for detecti ng surrounding objects (e.g., other AVs, human-driven 
vehicles, and pedestrians) and lights in the environm ent will cause traffic accidents. Alternatively, the 
risks will trigger vehicle safety warnings th at result in unexpected stopping of the AV.  
Exfiltrating data (active attack):  Data exfiltration is a security breach in which data stored in an 
AV are illegally copied, retrieved, and transferred by attackers. The breach could be through a remote 
application or a physical access point on the AV. Exfiltr ated data can be subsequently used to influence 8 
 human interactions with AVs and even fool AV users and/or AMS operators to take actions towards 
nefarious activities (Axelrod, 2017).  
Rebroadcasting message (active attack):  A cyber attacker can replay a previous message (e.g., an 
accident alert) to elicit a wanted reaction of an AV (e.g., stroke of a brake pedal). This reaction could 
force an AV into a vulnerable state (e.g., system reset) or allow the attacker to store information for 
future attacks. With message rebroadcasting, not only the information integrity but also message authentication and access control of an AV can be compromised.  
Introducing incorrect input signals (active attack):  If an attacker has access to the vehicle-to-
vehicle and/or vehicle-to-infrastructure communicati on networks of an AV, the attacker can trick the 
AV into an incorrect action by generating erroneous process information. For example, an accident 
alert can be sent by an attacker to an AV to activate the braking-pedal action, creating traffic disruptions in the surrounding area (Yagdereli et al., 2015). 
Modifying message (active attack):  A cyber attacker can modify messages either between AVs or 
between AVs and the AMS operator. The most common means of message modification is through 
“man-in-the-middle” attacks (Yagdereli et al., 2015). The modification can be delaying the 
sending/receiving time; inserting/deleting contents; and reordering the sequence that messages are sent. As such, modified messages can direct AVs to take actions wanted by the attacker. 
Eavesdropping (passive attack):  In eavesdropping, an attacker acquires vehicle movement and 
communications information by intercepting data tr affic to and from an AV. The acquired data are 
used to plan future active attacks. Data interception often takes place at devices in the middle of data 
transmission between AVs and AMS servers. In general, eavesdropping is difficult to detect since it does not cause abnormal data transmissions (Dobran, 2019). 
Traffic analysis (passive attack):  Similar to eavesdropping, traffic analysis does not affect the 
normal functioning of AV(s). An attacker deducts certain properties of information transactions 
including duration, timing, and bandwidth that are di fficult to disguise in communications. With the 
deducted information, traffic analysis can be performed to allow an attacker to examine the AV network for other malicious purposes (Yagdereli et al., 2015). 
3.2 System-level attacks 
Denial-of-Service (active attack):  A common issue for cybersecurity of communication networks, 
denial-of-service refers to prevention of authorized  user access to AMS. A denial-of-service attack can 
involve malicious coding and message spamming that absorb all available bandwidth, making 
communications between AVs and infrastructure un available. The AMS communications network will 9 
 be infected by malicious software or by the attacker constantly sending packets to AMS server ports 
to jam needed communications for normal AV functions such as routing, warning, and spatial sensing.  
Interrupting communications (active attack):  A cyber attacker interferes with communications 
between the control components of an AMS. By issuing a data request that causes the control systems 
to obstruct the normal processing sequence of the systems to respond to the request, this interference 
undermines the stability of routine communications and therefore operations of AMS (Kisner et al., 2010; Kisner, 2009). Such disruptions, once detected, will prompt the AMS operator to reduce or even 
cease provisions of mobility service in order to r ecover or switch to backup communication networks.  
Generating incorrect output values or commands (active attack):  This type of attacks generates 
erroneous output values or commands and sends them to devices in AMS that enable interaction 
between cyber and physical components. Consequently, an AMS operator can be misled to take AV routing and dispatching decisions that are not the best  for the current operational status, or even disrupt 
AMS operations and traffic on the roads. 
Collecting AMS operational information (passive attack):  This type of attack attempts to gain 
access to AMS operation data through eavesdro pping AMS servers. Although not disrupting normal 
functioning of AMS, the information collected can be  used to estimate the operational parameters and 
states of AMS such as distribution, speed, and fueli ng of AVs, and to help forge more targeted active 
cyber attacks in the future.  
 
4 Enhancing the cyber resilience of AMS 
Given the variety of plausible cy ber attacks, making AMS resilient to cyber attacks is critically 
important. The premise of doing so is to understand  what cyber resilience means for AMS. Answering 
this question will build on the understanding of cyber resilience and resilience in general, as is in 
subsection 4.1. In subsection 4.2, we will examine current practices in strengthening AV cybersecurity, 
a closely related issue to AMS cyber resilience. Furthe r strategies at both vehicle and system levels to 
enhance AMS cyber resilience are proposed in subsection 4.3.  
4.1 Resilience and cyber resilience 
4.1.1 Resilience 
We start our discussion with the most general definition of resilience. Following the 2019 version 
of the Merriam-Webster dictionary, resilience is described as the “ability to recover from or adjust easily to misfortune or change”. In  the academic literature, the concep t of resilience is initialized in the 10 
 context of ecological systems by Holling (1973), who refers to resilience as a system’s ability to persist 
without eventually moving to a different state of behavior when exposed to changes or shocks (Zou et 
al., 2018). Later, Bruneau et al. (2003) adapt the resilience concept in earthquake engineering, as the 
ability of a system to resist and absorb the impact of disruptions. Focusing on infrastructure systems, 
the definition of resilience is enriched by Faturech i and Miller-Hooks (2014) who argue that resilience 
accounts for possible interventions that help return system performance to near pre-disruption  levels. The authors stress the importance of resilience meas ures in quantifying the potential benefits of pre-
disruption mitigation actions for increasing the system’s ability to cope with disaster impact, as well 
as post-disaster adaptive actions that aim to restore system functionality. Another widely-used 
definition of resilience is from the US National Academy of Science (2012), which relates resilience 
to the ability of a system to plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events.  
While the definitions/descriptions of resilience vary in emphasis depending on the application 
context, resilience covers two essential aspects: 1) preparing a system before disruptions; and 2) 
recovering the system after disruptions occur. The preparation aspect can be alternatively interpreted 
as enhancing the resistance of a system to attacks. The aim of implementing a comprehensive resilience plan, therefore, is to reduce the potential damages caused by attacks through resistance and enhance 
fast recovery (Linkov et al., 2013). This two-aspect view is echoed by Zhou et al. (2019), who focus 
on transportation systems resilience and conclude th at all resilience definitions for transportation 
systems take the following two perspectives: i) th e ability to maintain the system functionality under 
disruptions; and ii) the time and resources required to restore performance after disruptions. As shown in Fig. 5, the first perspective is related to a disruption phase, beginning from the occurrence of a 
disruption and ending when the system performance reaches the minimum level. In this phase, 
robustness and redundancy of system functionalitie s are key to minimize the consequence of 
disruptions. The second perspective is associated  with a recovery phase. When it starts, system 
performance is expected to improve, till return to the original performance level which means full recovery. This phase usually takes a longer time than the disruption phase. The abundance and optimal 
and speedy use of resources are critical to recovery.  
 11 
  
Fig. 5.  Decomposing resilience into disruption and recovery phases,  
where P denotes performance (Source: Zhou et al., 2019). 
 
4.1.2 Cyber resilience 
The general definition of resilience needs to be  adapted when resilience specifically addresses 
cyber attacks. However, very limited definitions exist for cyber resilience. Linkov and Kott (2019) 
adapt the resilience definition by the US National A cademy of Sciences and define cyber resilience as 
the ability of a cyber-physical system to prepare, abs orb, recover, and adapt to adverse effects of events 
associated with cyber attacks. One can replace “cyber-physical system” by “AMS” if AMS cyber 
resilience is to be specifically defined.  
Compared to other types of resilience, cyber resilience exhibits three particularities. First, the 
cyber-physical system performance is likely to plummet to a low value shortly after a cyber attack 
begins. This is due to the fact that cyber a ttacks will be realized through communication networks, 
often very fast compared to natural processes (e.g., a wildfire or a flood). On the other hand, it may 
take some time for the consequences of a cyber attack on the physical system to appear and grow. For 
instance, when an attack introduces incorrect input signals to prompt a few AVs to brake, the resulting 
traffic jam will gradually grow from the locales of the attacked AVs to larger networks.  
The second particularity of cyber resilience lies on the greater uncertainty of cyber attacks in 
attacking forms and techniques which are constantly evolving. Consequently, the traditional approach 
to predict future attacks based on past experience of similar situations becomes less effective. Collier 
et al. (2014) highlight that the dynamic and fast deve lopment of different types of cyber attacks makes 
it impossible to maintain an exhaustive library of possible attack surfaces in the cyber domain. 
12 
 Moreover, the evolving possible surfaces of cyber attacks adds to the difficulty in ranking and 
prioritizing the importance of each attack and corresponding mitigation strategies.  
 The third particularity is about strategies to e nhance cyber resilience. Cyber resilience deals with 
connected complex systems involving hardware, software, and sensing components. In comparison to 
natural disasters, the smart nature of cyber attackers places another layer of complexity for cyber 
resilience enhancement. Cyber attackers have the flexibility to attack either part of a system or use more sophisticated attacking methods to cause deeper and broader consequences. Not surprisingly,  
strategies for resilience enhancement in the cyber world are more varied than strategies dealing with 
physical system resilience.  
Any enhancement of cyber resilience must be bu ilt on solid assessment of cyber resilience, which 
is still at an infant stage. Linkov and Kott (2019) ar gue that the assessment should draw ideas from the 
general resilience literature in which two primary approaches have been developed: metric-based and 
model-based (Fig. 6). The metric-based approach us es metrics of individual properties of system 
functions to assess the overall performance of a system. For instance, one metric for AMS cyber 
resilience, following the idea of Hallegatte et al. (2019) , can be the ratio of unfulfilled rider trips to the 
number of malfunctioning AVs for a period starting from the outset of a cyber attack. For this metric, the number of unfulfilled rider trips represents the loss of system functionality. The number of 
malfunctioning AVs captures the loss of assets. Intuitively, a lower metric value corresponds to greater 
cyber resilience.  
The model-based approach employs system configuration models and performs scenario analysis 
to predict system evolution before, during, and after an attack. This approach requires knowledge of the critical functions of the system, temporal patter ns of the system, thresholds, and system memory 
and its learning process (Linkov and Kott, 2019). As an example, the interactions between a cyber 
attacker and the AMS operator can be modeled as a sequential attack-defend game. Resilience will be 
measured based on the expected costs of Nash equilibrium between the attacker and the defender. A 
lower expected cost means higher AMS cyber resilience.  
 13 
  
Fig. 6.  Metric- and model-based approaches for cyber resilience risk assessment  
(source: Linkov and Kott, 2019). 
 
Both metric-based and model-based approaches have their limitations, however. For the metric-
based approach, despite a myriad of research efforts (Eisenberg et al., 2014; Park et al, 2013; Fischer 
et al., 2010), there remains a lack of universally a ccepted metrics for cyber resilience. The limitation 
is further compounded in the AMS context by the d earth of knowledge on the type, probability, and 
consequence of cyber attacks on AMS. For the model-based approach, it would be difficult for 
researchers to acquire all the knowledge about the critical functions of a cyber-physical system, the normal operation patterns of the system, and system ad aption after cyber attacks. Overall, assessment 
of cyber resilience remains an underexplored area for future research.  
4.2 Practices related to e nhancing cyber resilience 
As AMS does not exist, no practice exists for enha ncing AMS cyber resilience. On the other hand, 
cybersecurity as a closely related concept has garnered growing attention. The close relationship 
between cybersecurity and cyber resilience is not difficult to perceive: a system that is highly 
cybersecure will not be vulnerable to cyber attacks. On the other hand, cyber resilience is not just about cybersecurity in that cybersecurity focuses on the pre-attack preparation, whereas cyber resilience 
involves further post-attack recovery. For example, a system may be highly cybersecure but is not able 
to recover strongly and quickly once a cyber attack succeeds. Thus, the system is not cyber resilient.  
This subsection focuses on reviewing practices towards enhancing AV cybersecurity from two 
perspectives: 1) developing cybersecurity algorithms, and 2) establishing legislation and guidelines. We note that most practices are undertaken at the ve hicle level. The practices involve a wide range of 
14 
 stakeholders including computer scientists/electri cal engineers, transportation systems modelers/ 
analysts, mobility business executives/engineer s, urban planners, policy makers, etc. 
4.2.1 Cybersecurity algorithm development 
The auto industry has put tremendous efforts in developing algorithms to enhance vehicle 
cybersecurity (Tuncali et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), to enable vehicles to respond to abnormal 
situations not experienced before (Pei et al., 2017; Tian et al., 2018). These situations could well be 
signals of cyber attacks. By training cybersecurity algorithms to recognize and respond to the situations, the ability of AVs to with stand cyber attacks will be enhanced. 
Artificial intelligence, particularly deep neural networks, has been the prevalent technique for 
developing cybersecurity algorithms. However, at this  moment data for algorithm training is limited, 
which suggests that failures to cope with unrecognized cyber attacks can occur. This is because 
traditional, manual collection of data from tests or unguided simulations to identify cyber attacks would be prohibitively expensive (Karapathy, 2017; Sculley et al, 2014). Instead, machine-based testing 
methodologies are being developed toward automatica lly detecting erroneous behaviors of AVs (Tian 
et al., 2018). Given that the attacking forms and techniques are constantly evolving, detecting all 
abnormal situations tied with cyber attacks is still a daunting if not impossible task even with the 
machine-based testing methodologies. 
The research and development efforts for cybersecurity algorithm development goes beyond the 
auto industry. In the United States, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has established 
a department for research on safety, security, and reliability of connected and electronic vehicle 
systems. An Electronic Council is set up in the agency to enhance collaboration on and alignment of 
research related to vehicles and cybersecurity (McCarthy et al., 2014). Besides algorithm development, government agencies are also making endeavors in cybersecurity standard development, cyber risk 
assessment, cybersecurity test, and enforcement efforts.  
4.2.2 Legislation and guidelines 
National and subnational governments are playing active roles in enacting legislation and 
introducing guidelines to address cybersecurity issu es arising from future AVs as well as today’s 
vehicles. In the United States, the federal government has recently passed the SPY Car Act (2017) to address vehicle cybersecurity risks. The Act includes considerations to guard against the hacking of 
vehicles, such as requiring penetration testing to evaluate vehicle resilience to hacking and separating 
critical and non-critical software systems. In addition, the Act provides specifications to ensure security 
of collected information in vehicle electronic systems while the data are on the vehicle, in transit from 15 
 the vehicle to a different location, or in any offboard storage. This Act requires vehicles to have the 
capability to detect, prevent, and report attempts to  hijack the control of the vehicle and capture the 
stored data (Lim and Taeihagh, 2018; Taeihagh and Lim, 2019).  
Specific for AVs, the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has published a non-
mandatory document to facilitate integration of automated driving technologies that encourage the 
“development of systems that guard against cyber attacks” (NHTSA, 2017). The document provides recommendations for planning cyber incident responses, developing cyber vulnerability disclosure and 
reporting policies, and publishing Voluntary Safety Assessment letters. One purpose of this guideline 
is for standardization, i.e., encouraging entities to  design AV systems in compliance with standards 
established by stakeholder organizations such as the Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis 
Center, the Society of Automotive Engineers, and auto manufacturer associations (NHTSA, 2017). 
At the subnational level, a rule is drafted by the California Department of Motor Vehicles that 
requires auto manufacturers to certify the ability of th eir manufactured AVs to detect and react to cyber 
attacks according to industry standards (Cal DMV, 2018). The state of Massachusetts has introduced 
a state bill authorizing the state Department of  Consumer Affairs and Business Regulation to 
implement regulations consistent with federal regul ations to protect personal information and data 
collected by an Internet-of-Things device, which includes AVs (Senate Bill 179, 2017). Pennsylvania’s 
bill makes recommendations for AV testers to provide proof that cybersecurity precautions are taken. 
Immediate notification of cybersecurity intrusion attempts is required between AV testers and the 
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (P ennDOT, 2016; Senate Bill 427, 2017). Many other 
states in the United States, such as Georgia, Mich igan, and Texas, have also enacted legislation to 
address cybersecurity for larger systems inclus ive of AVs (Senate Bill 315, 2018; Senate Bill 632, 
2017; Texas Cybersecurity Act, 2017). 
4.3 Plausible strategies to enhance AMS cyber resilience 
Consistent with the discussions on cyber attacks and cyber resilience, we argue that plausible 
strategies to enhance AMS cyber resilience should consider both vehicle and system levels. Vehicle-
level strategies are expected to be implemented during AV design and manufacturing, while system-
level strategies will focus on the planning and operation of AMS.  
4.3.1 Vehicle-level strategies 
Auto manufacturers can mitigate the negative impact of cyber attacks on AVs by adopting a 
layered approach (GAO, 2016). In vehicle design, cyber-physical networks in a vehicle can be 
separated by artificial layers. For instance, one can create an engine control unit layer, an in-vehicle 16 
 communication network layer, and an external in terfaces layer. The layer creation will involve 
technologies such as gateways, firewall, message authentication and encryption, and intrusion 
detection and prevention systems (Fig. 7). During vehicle manufacturing, several practices can be 
further considered to identify and mitigate AV c yber vulnerabilities, including: 1) developing over-
the-air update capabilities for AV software and firmware; 2) conducting risk assessment and attack 
testing; and 3) creating domain separation for in-vehicle networks. For the last one, mission- and safety-critical components in an AV can be sepa rated from non-critical components, with limited 
connectivity to external networks through a few specific communication channels (GAO, 2016; ITF, 
2018). 
 
 
Fig. 7.  Illustration of a layered approach to e nhance AV cyber resilience (source: GAO, 2016). 
 
Another vehicle-level strategy is to equip an AV with the ability to continuously monitor its 
conditions and potential attacks independent of exte rnal communications. This ability will reduce the 
reliance of a vehicle on vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure networks and ensure prompt 
triggering of emergency response as soon as a failure is detected. The strategy can include devising an 
independent procedure for data collection and proce ssing and activating self-sustained vehicle control 
whenever external communications are disrupted. For instance, an AV can be designed such that it 
always compares the information received from the surrounding environment with the information 
collected and processed from its sensing instruments.  If a significant inconsistency is detected, an 
appropriate protocol will be triggered to let the AV rely on its own data for future maneuvering.  
4.3.2 System-level strategies 
From the perspective of transportation systems planning and operations, three strategies that entail 
the fundamental concepts for resilience enhancement can be considered: 1) maintaining redundancy, 
17 
 2) providing diversity, and 3) controlling propagation (Linkov and Kott, 2019). The first strategy 
pertains to maintaining redundancy in transportation capacity, which can be realized by: 1) operating 
an AV fleet size larger than the minimum necessary to meet day-to-day travel demand; 2) coordinating 
the operations of AVs with other modes, especially public transportation. The question of how much 
redundancy is important. A larger fleet contributes to greater AMS cyber resilience by mitigating the 
potential loss when a cyber attack disables the operations of a given number of AVs in the system. However, a larger AV fleet means greater capital and operating cost. To determine the optimal fleet 
size, careful economic analysis must be performed to quantify the trade-off between increased capital 
and operating cost due to redundancy under normal conditions and cyber resilience benefits under 
cyber attacks.  
It should be noted that some cyber attacks such as denial-of-service can be immune to an increase 
in AV fleet size, because the whole AMS will be affected. In such cases, providing alternative 
transportation modes independent of AMS will be particularly important. An obvious candidate is 
public transportation. While some argue that AMS would ultimately eliminate today’s human-
operating transit systems, the claim may be less valid under attack situations. Transit can provide 
valuable backup capacity to move disrupted AV travelers under cyber attacks. As such, the possibility of cyber attacks provides a valid argument for preserving an independent public transportation system 
in the future even after AMS takes place.  
For the second strategy, diversity is realized by ma intaining a separate road network for AVs that 
is free of connectivity. When AVs are using this network, they can only use their automation capability, 
with no communications between vehicles or between  vehicles and infrastructure. AVs would operate 
like conventional vehicles except that the movement of each AV will rely only on information collected 
by the AV’s own sensing instruments. This strategy aims to make AMS resilient to cyber attacks on 
communication networks. For example, if a distributed  denial-of-service attack occurs which can affect 
communications between AVs and the infrastructure serving the AVs, the AMS operator can divert 
AVs from the normal road network to this separate network. 
Maintaining a separate network, however, begs careful planning of the network. This network 
may be a newly built one but will be costly. Alterna tively, one can dedicate part of the existing road 
system to only conventional vehicles under normal conditions, and to both conventional vehicles and 
AVs when a cyber attack occurs. The size and connectivity of this separate network must be judiciously 
chosen by accounting for many factors such as travel demand, overall road network intensity and capacity, and mode share between AVs and conventional vehicles. Similar to the strategy of 
maintaining redundancy, this strategy should strike  a balance between the cost of preserving the 18 
 network under normal conditions and the benefits of the network in serving travel demand under cyber 
attacks. 
The third strategy is deploying different sub-autonomous mobility systems rather than a single 
homogeneous AMS. Among these subsystems, only limited data exchange and connections would be 
allowed so that when a cyber attack incurs to one  subsystem, its negative consequences are contained 
in the subsystem while other subsystems have high probability of retaining normal functionality. The idea is in fact analogous to the vehicle-level strategy of creating artificial layers and separation in 
subsection 4.3.1. One way to create subsystems is to have an AMS operator run independent sub-fleets, 
or mandate competing AMS operators. While market competition is known to benefit AMS users by 
reducing service price, introducing competing subsys tems in AMS brings the additional benefit of 
enhancing cyber resilience of the overall AMS. The disruption and recovery efforts would be smaller than if the attack spreads over the entire AMS.  
 
5 Conclusion and future research 
The increasing cyber connectivity of vehicles and between vehicles and infrastructure will 
drastically reshape the way humans move in the coming decades. While the advent of connected 
mobility—along with the coupled trend of vehicle automation—is expected to benefit travelers and the society by smoothing traffic, improving rider convenience, and reducing accidents, the augmented 
cyber components in connected and autonomous vehicles and related infrastructure also give rise to 
the issue of cyber attacks to the transportation system and how the system can be more resilient to such 
attacks. It is believed that malicious acts to exploit connected and autonomous vehicles are only a 
matter of time and will increasingly become a prominent issue in the future of our society.  
In view that little attention has been paid to transportation cyber resilience and autonomous 
vehicles are likely to dominate in the future mobility system, this paper takes a forward-looking 
approach looking into cyber resilience of AMS. A fi rst-of-its-kind investigation on this topic with a 
comprehensive literature review is offered. In th e investigation, we start by discussing the cyber 
components and plausible AMS operation scenarios. Then a considerable amount of effort is devoted to identifying possible cyber attacks to AMS at both vehicle and system levels. Building upon the 
literature of resilience and cyber resilience, the discussion moves to the concept of AMS cyber 
resilience and exploring existing practices to enhance AV cybersecurity, a concept intimately related 
to AMS cyber resilience. A number of strategies ar e subsequently investigated toward enhancing AMS 
cyber resilience. At the vehicle level, creating layers and separation to reduce cyber component 19 
 connectivity and deploying an independent procedure for data collection and processing are important 
in vehicle design and manufacturing. At the system level, recommended strategies include keeping 
redundancy in transportation capacity, maintaining a separate road network, and deploying different 
sub-autonomous mobility systems. To quantitatively as sess the benefits of these strategies, more 
elaborate, modeling-based research is needed.  
As AMS differs from today’s transportation system only by the extent of connectivity and 
automation and the shift from human-driven to autonomous mobility is going to be gradual, today’s 
transportation can also be informed by the findings, insights, and recommendations obtained in this 
paper. We hope that the effort presented in the paper makes a start toward greater understanding cyber 
resilience of AMS and connected transportation in general. More in-depth investigations can be 
stimulated in this important but still underappreciated area for a better future of human mobility.  
 
  20 
 References 
1. Axelrod, C. W. (2017, May). Cybersecurity in the age of autonomous vehicles, intelligent traffic 
controls and pervasive transportation networks. In Systems, Applications and Technology 
Conference (LISAT), 2017 IEEE Long Island (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 
2. Center for Sustainable Systems (2018). Autonomous  Vehicles Factsheet. Center for Sustainable 
Systems, University of Michigan. Pub. No. CSS16-18. 
3. Cisco (2019). What Are the Most Common Cyberattacks? Available at:  
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products /security/common-cyberattacks.html . (accessed on 
22.05.2019). 
4. Collier, Z. A., DiMase, D., Walters, S., Tehrani poor, M. M., Lambert, J. H., & Linkov, I. (2014). 
Cybersecurity standards: Managing risk and creating resilience. Computer, 47(9), 70-76. 
5. Consumer Watchdog (2019). Kill switch: Why connected cars can be killing machines and how 
to turn them off. Available at: https://www.consumerwatchdog.org/report/kill-switch-why-
connected-cars-can-be-killing-machines-and-how-turn-them  (accessed 10.29.2019). 
6. Deloitte (2016). The future of mobility: what’s next? Available at: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/ us/articles/3367_Future-of-mobility-whats-
next/DUP_Future-of-mobility-whats-next.pdf  (accessed 02.02.2019).  
7. Department of Motor vehicles (2018). Modified  Express Terms Title 13, Division 1, Chapter 1 
Article 3.8—Deployment of Autonomous Vehicles—Deployment of Autonomous Vehicles; 
State of California Department of Motor Vehicles: Sacramento, CA, USA, 2018. 
8. Dobran, J. (2019). 17 Types of cyber-attacks to secure your company from in 2019. Phoenixnap. 
Available online at: https://phoenixnap.com/blog/cyber-security-attack-types  (accessed on 
05.23.2019). 
9. Eisenberg, D. A., Linkov, I., Park, J., Bates, M. E., Fox-Lent, C., & Seager, T. P. (2014). 
Resilience metrics: lessons from military doctrines. Solutions, 5(5), 76-87. 
10. Faturechi, R., Levenberg, E., & Miller-Hooks, E.  (2014). Evaluating and optimizing resilience of 
airport pavement networks. Computers & Operations Research, 43, 335-348. 
11. Faturechi, R., & Miller-Hooks, E. (2014). M easuring the performance of transportation 
infrastructure systems in disasters: A comprehens ive review. Journal of infrastructure systems, 
21(1), 04014025. 
12. Government Accountability Office (GAO) (2016). Vehicle cybersecurity: DOT and industry 
have efforts under way, but DOT needs to define its role in responding to a real-world attack. 
Available at: https://www.gao.gov/as sets/680/676064.pdf (accessed 01.29.2019). 
13. Hallegatte, S, Rentschler, J., & Rozenberg, J. (2019). Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure 
Opportunity. World Bank Report.  
14. Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual review of ecology 
and systematics, 4(1), 1-23. 
15. International Transportation Forum (ITF) (2018). Corporate partnership board report. Safer 
Roads with Automated Vehicles. ITF/OECD. 
16. Karapathy, A. Software 2.0. Available online at: https://medium.com/@karpathy/software-2-0-
a64152b37c35. Accessed on: 2019-05-13. 
17. Kisner, R. A. (2009). Design practices for communications and workstations in highly integrated 
control rooms. US Nuclear Regulatory Commi ssion, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research. 21 
 18. Kisner, R. A., Manges, W. W., MacIntyre, L. P., Nutaro, J. J., Munro, J. K., Ewing, P. D., ... & 
Olama, M. M. (2010). Cybersecurity through real-time distributed control systems. Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, Technical Report ORNL/TM-2010/30. 
19. Kott, A., & Linkov, I. (Eds.). (2019). Cyber resilience of systems and networks. Ch. 1. Springer 
International Publishing. 
20. Lim, H., & Taeihagh, A. (2018). Autonomous vehicl es for smart and sustainable cities: An in-
depth exploration of privacy and cybersecurity implications. Energies, 11(5), 1062. 
21. Linkov, I., Eisenberg, D. A., Plourde, K., Seager, T. P., Allen, J., & Kott, A. (2013). Resilience 
metrics for cyber systems. Environment Systems and Decisions, 33(4), 471-476. 
22. Litman, T. (2018). Autonomous vehicle implementation predictions: implication for transport 
planning. Victoria Transport Institute, available at: https://www.vtpi.org/avip.pdf (accessed 02.05.2019). 
23. McCarthy, C., Harnett, K., & Carter, A. (2014). A summary of cybersecurity best practices (No. 
DOT HS 812 075). United States. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
24. Miller-Hooks, E., Zhang, X., & Faturechi, R. ( 2012). Measuring and maximizing resilience of 
freight transportation networks. Computers & Operations Research, 39(7), 1633-1643. 
25. National Academy of Sciences (2012). Disaster resilience: a national imperative. Available at: 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13457  (accessed 01.31. 2019). 
26. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2017). Automated driving systems 2.0: A 
vision for safety. Washington, DC: US Department of Transportation, DOT HS, 812, 442. 
27. Noruzoliaee, M., & Zou, B. (2019). One-to-many matching and section-based formulation of 
autonomous ridesharing equilibrium. Working Paper, University of Illinois at Chicago. 
28. Park, J., Seager, T. P., Rao, P. S. C., Convertino, M., & Linkov, I. (2013). Integrating risk and 
resilience approaches to catastrophe management in engineering systems. Risk Analysis, 33(3), 
356-367. 
29. Pei, K., Cao, Y., Yang, J., & Jana, S. (2017, October). Deepxplore: Automated whitebox testing 
of deep learning systems. In proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems 
Principles (pp. 1-18). ACM. 
30. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. (2016) Pennsylvania autonomous vehicle testing 
policy: Final draft report of the autonomous vehicle policy task force. Available at: 
https://www.penndot.gov/ProjectAndPrograms/Res earchandTesting/Documents/AV%20Testing
%20Policy%20DRAFT%20FINAL%20REPORT.pdf  (accessed 12 June 2019).  
31. Resilience. Merriam-Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, n.d. Available at: http://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/resilience  (accessed 31 January 2019). 
32. Sculley, D., Holt, G., Golovin, D., Davydov, E., Phillips, T., Ebner, D., ... & Young, M. (2014). 
Machine learning: The high interest credit card of technical debt. 
33. Senate Bill 179. Regular Session. Massachusetts, U.S., 2017. Available online: 
https://legiscan.com/MA/text/S179/2017  (accessed on 12 April 2019). 
34. Senate Bill 315. 2018. General Georgia Assembly. Available online: http://www.legis.ga.gov/ 
legislation/en-US/Display/20172018/SB/315  (accessed on 12 June 12, 2019). 
35. Senate Bill 427. Regular Session. Pennsylvania, U.S., 2017. Available online: 
https://www.legis.state.pa.us/CFDOCS/Legis/PN/Public/btCheck.cfm?txtType=PDF&sessYr=20
17&sessInd=0&billBody=S&billTyp=B&billNbr=0427&pn=0396  (accessed on 12 June 2019). 22 
 36. Senate Bill 632. Michigan Legislature. Available online: http://www.legislature.mi.gov/ 
(S(vmn1lcsk4itpxnklnvktpazb))/mileg.aspx?page=GetObject&objectname=2017-SB-0632  
(accessed on 12 June 2019). 
37. SPY Car Act (2017). 115th Congress. United States of America, 2017. Available online: 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/680/text (accessed on 12 April 2019). 
38. Taeihagh, A., & Lim, H. S. M. (2019). Governin g autonomous vehicles: emerging responses for 
safety, liability, privacy, cybersecurity, and industry risks. Transport Reviews, 39(1), 103-128. 
39. Texas Cybersecurity Act. 2017. Available online: https://capitol.texas.gov/tlodocs/85R/billtext/pdf 
/HB00008F.pdf#navpanes=0  (accessed 12 June 2019) 
40. Tian, Y., Pei, K., Jana, S., & Ray, B. (2018, May). Deeptest: Automated testing of deep-neural-
network-driven autonomous cars. In Proceedings of the 40th international conference on software engineering (pp. 303-314). ACM. 
41. Tuncali, C. E., Fainekos, G., Ito, H., & Kapins ki, J. (2018, June). Simulation-based adversarial 
test generation for autonomous vehicles with machine learning components. In 2018 IEEE 
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp. 1555-1562). IEEE. 
42. Yagdereli, E., Gemci, C., & Akta ş, A. Z. (2015). A study on cyber-security of autonomous and 
unmanned vehicles. The Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation, 12(4), 369-381. 
43. Zhang, M., Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Liu, C., & Khurshid, S. (2018). Deeproad: Gan-based 
metamorphic autonomous driving system testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02295. 
44. Zhou, Y., Wang, J., & Yang, H. (2019). Resilience of Transportation Systems: Concepts and 
Comprehensive Review. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 
45. Zou, B., Rockne, K. J., Vitousek, S., & Noruzoliaee, M. (2018). Ecosystem and Transportation 
Infrastructure Resilience in the Great Lakes. E nvironment: Science and Policy for Sustainable 
Development, 60(5), 18-31. 