International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
Digital Diabetes Care System Observations from a
Pilot Evaluation Study in Vietnam
Tran Quang Khanh1, Pham Nhu Hao2, Eytan Roitman3, Itamar Raz4, Baruch Marganitt5
and Avivit Cahn4,*
1Head of Endocrinology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh City 72000,
Vietnam; khanh.tran007@yahoo.com
2Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh City 72000, Vietnam;
pnhhao@yahoo.com
3Head Diabetes Technologies Clinic, Diabetes consultant to the Clalit Health Services, Tel Aviv 6209804, Israel;
eytan@glucome.com
4Diabetes Unit, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hadassah Medical Center, Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, The Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem 91120, Israel; ntv502@netvision.net.il
5GlucoMe Ltd., Yarkona 4591500, Israel; baruch@glucome.com
*Correspondence: avivit@hadassah.org.il; Tel.: 97-226-776-498; Fax: 97-226-437-940
Received: 18 January 2020; Accepted: 1 February 2020; Published: 3 February 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Digital technologies are gaining an important role in the management of patients with
diabetes. We assessed clinical outcomes and user satisfaction of incorporating a digital diabetes
care system in diabetes clinics of a developing country. The system integrated a wireless blood
glucose monitor that communicates data to any smartphone utilizing a patented acoustic data transfer
method, a mobile-app, and cloud-based software that stores, analyzes, and presents data. Five hospital
endocrinology clinics in Vietnam sequentially recruited all patients willing to join the study, providing
they had a smartphone and access to internet connectivity. Face-to-face visits were conducted at
baseline and at 12 weeks, with monthly digital visits scheduled in the interim and additional digital
visits performed as needed. HbA1c levels were measured at baseline and at 12 weeks ( 20 days).
The study included 300 patients of whom 279 completed the evaluation. Average glucose levels
declined from 170.4 64.6 mg /dL in the ﬁrst 2 weeks to 150.8 53.2 mg /dL in the last 2 weeks ( n=221;
p<0.001). HbA1c levels at baseline and 12 weeks declined from 8.3% 1.9% to 7.6% 1.3% ( n=126;
p<0.001). The digital solution was broadly accepted by both patients and healthcare professionals
and improved glycemic outcomes. The durability, scalability, and cost-e ectiveness of this approach
merits further study.
Keywords: connected diabetes care; diabetes mellitus; glucose monitoring; digital health
1. Introduction
Patients with diabetes generate substantial amounts of clinically signiﬁcant data on a daily basis.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) levels along with automated or patient-reported recordings
of food intake, physical activity, medication, and insulin timing and doses can form an entire metabolic
kaleidoscope [ 1–3]. These data often go unobserved, and the prevailing challenge is collecting and
using these data to improve patient care, as well as achieving lower glucose levels.
Striving for glucose levels that are as low as can be safely attained reduces long term
complications [ 4]. This can be achieved by monitoring glucose levels—at individually dictated
intervals—and adjusting diet, medication, or insulin doses accordingly [ 4]. SMBG is frequently
performed by patients, yet, often there is no resultant action. Patients may be unsure of if or how to
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937; doi:10.3390 /ijerph17030937 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijerphInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 2 of 11
modify their dietary or medical regimen in light of the glucose measurements. Moreover, physicians
and other members of the healthcare team may neglect to review these data with the patients during
their infrequent visits to the diabetes clinic. Additionally, several weeks following an episode of
signiﬁcant hyper- or hypo-glycemia, the patient may not remember what led to the abnormal glucose
measurement, and cannot discuss with the healthcare team the means to prevent subsequent events
from occurring [5].
Aiming to utilize patients’ self-monitored blood glucose data, a point of care glucose monitoring
device combined with mobile technology can enable real-time transmission of glucose values to a
centralized system [ 6–8]. Supplementing this system with automatic alerts that can be transmitted to
the healthcare providers, patients, or signiﬁcant others, can enable mindful and timely use of these
data. Furthermore, centrally available data may be used to monitor a single clinic or a large population,
follow patient trends, and recognize regional patterns. This may enable reaching out in time to patients
who are in need, while reducing the frequency of visits of patients who are well-controlled, thus
enabling judicious allocation of limited time resources.
The GlucoMe digital diabetes care platform is designed to address these multiple aspects of
diabetes care for patients, caregivers, healthcare professionals, and providers /payers. The platform
integrates a novel glucose monitoring device, mobile software, and a cloud-based big data computing
infrastructure in order to close the loop of diabetes care, improve outcomes, and streamline costly
diabetes management [ 9]. The simplicity of the device, mandating only that the user has a smartphone
and internet connectivity, while precluding the need for manual download of the data, enables its
incorporation in diabetes clinics of a developing country.
Diabetes care is ever more challenging in developing countries, with diabetes prevalence soaring
in the face of limited healthcare personnel and resources. Nevertheless, smartphone connectivity is
high, with 84% of the people in the major cities, and 68% in rural areas overall owning a smartphone in
Vietnam [10]. This may present an opportunity for increasing access to diabetes care.
This pilot study was designed to evaluate the market acceptance of GlucoMe’s digital diabetes
system in Vietnam and to assess the feasibility of incorporating it in the clinical care of patients with
diabetes in a developing market.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. The Digital Diabetes Care System
The digital diabetes care system was developed by GlucoMe to provide a holistic digital solution for
patients with diabetes and their healthcare providers. It is composed of several components (Figure 1):
(1) Wireless point of care blood glucose monitor . This CE (Conformit éEurop éenne )-certiﬁed blood
glucose monitor (BGM) is not dependent on traditional wireless communication protocols but
connects to any iOS or Android smartphone using a simple, unique, and patented acoustic data
transfer method. Data in the BGM are converted to binary format and encoded to audio frequencies
by a proprietary audio protocol along with an error correction mechanism. These are transmitted
through the BGM’s speaker and received by a smartphone’s microphone. The smartphone parses
the audio waves and converts them to binary and then to actual values. The glucose monitor’s
data transmission mechanism is not inﬂuenced by environmental noise. Tested in over 1200
scenarios at various noise levels and diverse environments (o ce, concerts, nature, restaurants,
etc.), it performed ﬂawlessly, with 100% measurement accuracy and integrity [9].
(2) Mobile app. The app is compatible with any iOS or Android smartphone, and securely transmits
real-time blood glucose data for cloud-based analyses, enabling two-way communication between
patients and healthcare professionals. The app provides a set of user-friendly monitoring and
management tools for the patient, including a logbook of measurements, estimated HbA1c,
glucose distribution, and trends. It additionally enables data sharing with caregivers and medicalInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 3 of 11
professionals, formulation of diabetes treatment plans, as well as carbohydrate intake and
exercise tracking.
(3) Cloud-based digital diabetes clinic and control tower software. This software can utilize data from
the blood glucose monitor, or connect to external sources for data. It analyzes and presents the
patients’ data in a user-friendly interface. Data can also be collated from multiple patients and
clinics to provide population management reports. Individualized alerts can be deﬁned according
to pre-speciﬁed thresholds and sent to patients or healthcare professionals.
Figure 1. System components.
The system received regulatory approval in Vietnam and, prior to the study, the entire system
was adjusted to the Vietnamese market, including translations of the smartphone app, digital diabetes
clinic, and control tower software, as well as blood glucose monitoring instruction for use, along with
video and commercial materials.
2.2. Study Design
This pilot study was a single arm market acceptance evaluation study aiming to assess the
feasibility of incorporating a digital diabetes care system into routine patient care in a developing
country. The study assessed changes in glycemic parameters, as well as patient and physician
satisfaction with the system.
The study enrolled patients in ﬁve endocrinology clinics in Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC), Vietnam,
between August 2018 and January 2019. The study was approved by the hospitals’ ethics committee,
and all patients signed informed consent prior to participation.
2.3. Study Conduct
2.3.1. System Setup
Prior to study initiation, the GlucoMe software system (GlucoMe Ltd. Yarkona, Israel) was
installed in the hospitals’ endocrinology clinics. Two group orientation sessions for the healthcare
professionals were held, followed by individual face-to-face meetings and remote support sessions,
on a per-needed basis. Ongoing technical support to the healthcare professionals as needed was
provided by dedicated local support team members.
2.3.2. Inclusion Criteria
Patients were recruited in the endocrinology clinic of each participating hospital, on the basis
of the natural ﬂow of patients in the clinic. All patients attending the clinic during the study periodInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 4 of 11
who could beneﬁt from regular glucose monitoring as judged by their treating physicians were o ered
participation. Patients were included, providing they (1) had a smartphone and were able to operate
the device, and (2) had ongoing access to internet connectivity.
2.3.3. Enrollment Visit
Patients suitable for the pilot signed informed consent forms prior to participation. Each patient
then received a blood glucose monitoring kit and the GlucoMe App was downloaded and installed on
the patient’s smartphone. Training on the operation of the blood glucose monitor and smartphone
application was provided, and it was based on a detailed patient onboarding protocol. A demo test
was conducted on-site by the patient to ensure the patient’s understanding on the mode of operation.
The preferred interaction mode with the patient was discussed and agreed upon (Short Message
Service (SMS) texting, telephone, etc.), to enable smooth communication in the ongoing digital visits.
The healthcare professional deﬁned the individualized thresholds for automatic messages to be sent to
the patients, o ering positive feedback or prompting action. Blood was drawn for HbA1c, unless a
recent HbA1c result (within 20 days) was available.
On average, the patients’ onboarding process took about 30 min. Group orientation sessions were
performed for most of the patients in groups of three to four patients.
2.3.4. Digital Visits
Digital visits were conducted monthly, following the initial visit, and additional digital visits
were performed as needed (Figure 2). These visits constituted a review of the patient’s glucose
log and analytics using the digital diabetes clinic desktop application. On the basis of the data,
the physician determined whether the existing treatment was appropriate or if a treatment change
was mandated. Upon completion of a digital visit, a summary message was sent to the patient via the
digital diabetes clinic system. Unscheduled digital visits were added as needed to address patient
queries or control-tower alerts that prompted for action.
Figure 2. Study design.
2.3.5. Patient Data Monitoring and Automated Alerts
The digital diabetes clinic control tower system software was operated mainly by a healthcare
professional (a doctor or a nurse) who monitored all patients connected to the system in a routine
ongoing fashion. Alerts were generated automatically on the basis of each patient’s glycemic control
targets and SMBG adherence alert deﬁnitions. For example, an alert could be generated in response to
a single or several glucose measurement crossing a pre-speciﬁed threshold, or in response to lack of
adherence to the predeﬁned SMBG protocol in the recent week. Each alert was addressed through a
resolution protocol, which was based on clinical instructions of the medical sta communicating withInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 5 of 11
the patient using pre-deﬁned messages of the “Hospital customized messaging library”. Some alerts
mandated getting in touch with the patient in the mode that was agreed upon at enrollment, whereas
others consisted of sending the patient a reminder for glucose monitoring or o ering positive feedback.
2.3.6. Final Visit
The patient returned to the clinic for a ﬁnal visit 12 weeks after enrollment. The patient’s
treatment regimen was reviewed and modiﬁed. Blood was drawn for HbA1c unless a recent (within
20 days) HbA1c test result was available and was used as an end of pilot result. The patient
completed a satisfaction questionnaire regarding ease of use of the glucometer (5 questions), mobile
app (10 questions), and overall system (4 questions). The treating physician completed a satisfaction
questionnaire regarding personal experience with the GlucoMe system in the management of the
speciﬁc patient. Physicians completed satisfaction questionnaires following the entire trial period as
well. Full questionnaires are available in the online Supplementary Materials. Patients were followed
for an additional 20 days for adverse events and ad-lib glucose monitoring.
2.4. Outcome Measures
Outcome measures included:
(1) Change in glycemic parameters—overall glucose levels, fasting glucose levels, and HbA1c.
(2) Frequency of glucose monitoring.
(3) Patient and physician satisfaction as assessed by questionnaires.
We also assessed the frequency of contact between patients and healthcare professionals, deﬁned
as digital touchpoints. A day with a “digital touchpoint” is a day in which at least one of the following
happened: a control tower event was resolved by the medical team, a digital visit took place, or a
message was sent from /to the patient to /from the medical team.
2.5. Statistical Analyses
Only patients completing the pilot were included in the data analyses. Data presented are mean 
SD. Di erence in overall glucose levels between initial 2 weeks and ﬁnal 2 weeks was calculated only
for those patients with glucose measurements at both time points. Glucose levels that were tagged by
the patient as fasting were included in analysis of fasting glucose levels.
The average responses to each aspect of the system were calculated for all patients and are
presented as averages of the categories. The responses of the physicians to the individual questions
were calculated as well. Obstacles to care were listed in the satisfaction questionnaires as free text,
and these were grouped by two members of the research team, each individually, with disagreements
resolved by discussion. SPSS Statistics version 25.0 (IBM, NY, USA) was used for all analyses.
3. Results
Overall, 300 patients were enrolled in the pilot in 5 participating hospitals, of whom 279 completed
the evaluation. Dropout was due to change in internet access availability (18) or death (3). The average
number of weekly glucose measurements is shown in Figure 3. At week 12 and during the 20-day
follow-up period afterwards, 81% of the patients were still engaging with the system and had still been
measuring glucose.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 6 of 11
Figure 3. Weekly glucose measurements.
Average glucose levels, as seen in Figure 4, declined from 170.4 64.6 mg /dL in the ﬁrst 2 weeks
to 150.8 53.2 mg /dL in the last 2 weeks ( n=221,p<0.001). Fasting glucose levels declined from 141.9
39.3 to 135.1 32.5 ( n=103, p<0.001). HbA1c levels at baseline and 12 weeks were available for
only 126 of the patients, and declined from 8.3% 1.9% to 7.6% 1.3% ( p<0.001).
Figure 4. Average glucose levels in study weeks by participating centers.
Over the study period, an average of 14 digital touch point days occurred per patient, equivalent
to an average of 1 digital touchpoint every 6.2 days.
There was signiﬁcant variation in the average number of digital touch point days between
hospitals, spanning from 9–18 days in the di erent centers.
Overall, 262 patients completed the questionnaires at the ﬁnal visit (Table 1). Patients were satisﬁed
with the technical aspects of the glucometer, the mobile app, and the overall system. There were 23
physicians who completed questionnaires regarding 260 individual patients and regarding their overall
satisfaction with the system. Physicians felt the system led to better care, e ciency, and organization
of the data, and would recommend using it (Table 1).Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 7 of 11
Table 1. Patient and physician satisfaction.
Questionnaire ItemExtremely
SatisﬁedVery Satisﬁed SatisﬁedVery
DissatisﬁedExtremely
Dissatisﬁed
5 4 3 2 1
Patient satisfaction ( n=262)
Overall system
(5 questions)54% 42% 4% 0% 0%
Mobile app
(10 questions)37% 28% 34% 1% 0%
Blood glucose
monitor
(4 questions)40% 33% 26% 1% 0%
Overall physician satisfaction ( n=23)
Better organization
of data52% 48% 0% 0% 0%
Better e ciency 65% 35% 0% 0% 0%
Better care 52% 43% 4% 0% 0%
I would recommend
using it48% 48% 4% 0% 0%
Physician satisfaction per patient ( n=260)
Ease of using app 44% 40% 16% 0% 0%
Ease of
reading glucose42% 43% 14% 0% 0%
Ease of
reading reports43% 42% 15% 0% 0%
Usefulness of data 39% 39% 21% 1% 0%
General impression 44% 38% 18% 0% 0%
The physicians and patients listed possible obstacles for expanding the GlucoMe service in
Vietnam as free text, and answers were grouped by the pilot team. Leading obstacles noted included
lack of smartphone, lack of internet connectivity, and cost. Other obstacles mentioned included limited
availability, older age, requirement for training, and fear of acceptance of a new technology (Figure 5).
Figure 5. Obstacles to global implementation of the system.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 8 of 11
4. Discussion
In this pilot study, we demonstrated the feasibility of incorporating digital technology in the care of
patients with diabetes in a developing country. Glucose levels declined within the ﬁrst 2 weeks, with a
durable e ect throughout the study. Additionally, the vast majority of patients remained engaged with
the system over the study time, and a clinically signiﬁcant HbA1c reduction was obtained. Moreover,
patient and physician satisfaction with the system overall and its components was high.
SMBG has become an important aspect of patient care because of its widespread availability.
This is most evident for patients who are taking insulin, where SMBG is the basis for dose titration;
however, even in non-insulin-treated patients, SMBG may facilitate better adherence to dietary and
medication regimen. In standard practice, SMBG values are often ignored in the routine clinical visit,
overlooking clinically signiﬁcant data, which may assist in decision making [ 5]. Studies examining the
glycemic beneﬁts of SMBG have shown mixed results, whereby a major determinant of beneﬁt was
the extent to which patient education, as well as response to SMBG levels, was implemented [ 11–13].
A meta-analysis of studies that utilized automatic mobile transmission of SMBG levels showed a HbA1c
beneﬁt of  0.27 (95% CI:  0.03,  0.51) [ 14]. However, when analyzing studies by mode of delivery of
telemedicine, that is, by human calls or human messages (SMS or online), these led to HbA1c reductions
of 0.98 (  0.42,  1.54) and  0.69 (  0.26,  1.13), respectively [ 14]. A meta-analysis of interventions
incorporating individually tailored text messaging, with many messages addressing uploaded glucose
values, demonstrated a meaningful 0.54% (95% CI:  0.08,  0.99) HbA1c reduction [ 15]. Thus, SMBG
prescription to patients should be a part of a broad educational program, with ongoing instruction
and regular evaluation in order to beneﬁt from its use and justify it economically [7,11]. In our study,
GlucoMe’s digital diabetes system streamlined SMBG readings and utilized both automated messaging
as well as human calls or messages, which were scheduled monthly with additional contact made as
needed. This judicious use of the frequently overlooked SMBG levels may have contributed to the
reduced glycemic levels observed in our study, although improved adherence and medical follow-up
were probably important contributors as well.
Digital technologies are gaining an important role in the management of patients with diabetes,
enabling close monitoring and advanced follow-up of patients’ glycemic control and adherence to
treatment. Nevertheless, over the decade of evolvement of these novel technologies and approaches,
it is becoming clear that although digital health may facilitate better care, it will not replace the human
touch. Human factors such as empathy, compassion, and experience cannot be fully captured and
taken into consideration in the digital interactions, and inter-personal contact will remain an essential
part of the patient visit [16].
In this sense, the GlucoMe digital diabetes system creates a balance that preserves yet supplements
the human factor. The limited time window of the encounter of the patient with the healthcare
professional is not wasted on analyzing or recording data. These are presented conveniently to the
caregiver by utilizing the digital diabetes system software, thereby enabling a discussion that is focused
on that which is beyond the data. The initial and ﬁnal study visits in our study were a face-to-face
interaction, yet, the interim digital touch-points presented an opportunity to ﬁne-tune care and retain
some therapeutic tension during the study. This combined approach may have contributed to the good
durability observed in our study.
Interestingly, although we observed a gradual decline in patients’ engagement with the system,
glucose levels declined early and remained low, with a resultant improvement in HbA1c levels. This may
indicate a possible “learning curve” of the patients, who adjusted their lifestyle and medication regimen
according to the more frequent initial readings, and successfully adhered to the changes these mandated
over time. Moreover, interaction with the system occurred in average on a weekly basis, with a digital
touchpoint every 6.2 days; thus, in spite of reduction in measurements, patients still remained engaged
with the system to some extent.
Overall satisfaction with the system was high, as reﬂected both in the patient and physician
questionnaires. The patients found the system easy to use, with high satisfaction rates found especiallyInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 9 of 11
for the glucose monitor, whereby its connectability features did not hamper ease and simplicity of use.
Physicians felt the use of the system simpliﬁed data intake and led to greater e ciency and better care.
With the use of the system, the physicians were able to proﬁciently review the patients’ data, which was
displayed in a graphical and self-explanatory manner, leading to more e cient use of time during the
clinical encounter. Moreover, the system enabled selection of patients in poorer control—mandating
unscheduled digital visits to improve glycemia, and yielding better use of limited time. Although
uploading and installing the system was time consuming, it did pay o in better use of clinical time
thereafter. Although cost was listed by some as a barrier to further expansion of this technology, time
saving obtained by precluding the need to download data and by faster interpretation of data may
lead to cost saving. Still, the cost of SMBG—that is, the actual cost of the BGM, and particularly of the
testing strips—comprise the majority of the cost burden, and this remains an economic challenge in
developing countries.
Connected glucose monitors have become increasingly popular in recent years [ 7,17–19]. These
aim to provide continuous care, increase patient satisfaction, and improve glycemic control while
leading to cost-saving. The majority of these applications demonstrated clinical e cacy, mostly on
the basis of observational data, and some on randomized controlled studies. Reported improvements
in HbA1c ranged from 0.3–2.4%, with most reductions at <1.0%, with baseline HbA1c being an
important determinant of change [ 7]. In this respect, the preliminary results of our study showing
an HbA1c reduction of 0.7% is in line with published data. Additionally, similar to what has been
observed in our study, connected glucose meters led to improved patient satisfaction [ 7,18]. Reduced
medical spending has been demonstrated in a large study of connected glucose monitoring [ 20], and
additional cost-e ectiveness data is being collected for many other applications as well [ 7]. Nonetheless,
in spite of the wealth of data available on connected care in developed countries, the feasibility of its
implementation in developing countries is less well established. Telemedicine has been employed in
developing countries for multiple aspects of diabetes care. It has been utilized to increase awareness
to the disease and its complications and to monitor glucose levels. In addition, some studies have
been conducted on remote screening for retinopathy, although further study of the feasibility and
cost-e ectiveness of these di erent approaches mandate further study [ 21]. In our study, approximately
a quarter of the patients and physicians felt lack of smartphone or internet connectivity would be
signiﬁcant obstacles in further promotion of the technology in Vietnam. The patients joining our
study did not have these technological limitations (excluding 6%), and thus may not be representative
of the overall diabetic population in Vietnam. However, with the expanding use of internet and
smartphones in Vietnam and other developing nations, this issue will probably be further mitigated in
the upcoming years.
Several limitations of our study should be noted. First, this was a single-arm market evaluation
pilot study, and thus the participating population may have high motivation and competence,
not reﬂective of the overall diabetic population. Second, the study duration was short, and although
the preliminary data are promising, long term follow-up is mandated. Finally, due to local regulations,
patient identiﬁed data were collected and retained locally, and only glucose levels and data gathered
digitally during the study were centrally analyzed.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, this market evaluation study established the feasibility of incorporating digital care
in the routine care of patients with diabetes in a developing market. Glycemic indices improved and
patient and physician satisfaction with the system were extremely high.
This study indicates the existing potential in implementation of digital technologies in emerging
markets, which despite limited resources are capable of harnessing mobile technology to diabetes
care. Nevertheless, putting this program into practice at a large scale requires long-term follow up
and cost-e ectiveness analyses. A future longer and controlled study will assess the e ect of the
intervention compared to standard-of-care on the glycemic e ects observed. Moreover, a sub-study willInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 10 of 11
ascertain the resources required for program set-up vs. long-term cost-saving derived from improved
and targeted care.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http: //www.mdpi.com /1660-4601 /17/3/937/s1,
File 1: Patient and Physicians Satisfaction Questionnaires.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.Q.K., P .N.H., E.R. and B.M.; methodology, T.Q.K., P .N.H. and B.M.;
formal analysis, E.R., B.M. and A.C.; investigation, T.Q.K., P .N.H., E.R., I.R., B.M. and A.C.; resources, T.Q.K.
and B.M.; data curation, T.Q.K., P .N.H., E.R., I.R., B.M. and A.C.; writing—original draft preparation, A.C.;
writing—review and editing, T.Q.K., P .N.H., E.R., I.R., B.M. and A.C.; project administration, T.Q.K. and B.M.;
funding acquisition, T.Q.K. and B.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: Funding for this study was provided by Merck Healthcare KGaA.
Conﬂicts of Interest: E.R., I.R., and A.C. are consultants of GlucoMe. B.M. is an employee of GlucoMe. T.G.K.
and P .N.H. have nothing to declare.
References
1. Nikhil, A.S.; Timothy, D.A.; Patel, D.K. Smart connected insulin pens, caps, and attachments: A review of the
future of diabetes technology. Diabetes Spectr. 2019 ,32, 378–384. [CrossRef]
2. Cahn, A.; Akirov, A.; Raz, I. Digital health technology and diabetes management. J. Diabetes 2018 ,10, 10–17.
[CrossRef]
3. Shan, R.; Sarkar, S.; Martin, S.S. Digital health technology and mobile devices for the management of diabetes
mellitus: State of the art. Diabetologia 2019 ,62, 877–887. [CrossRef]
4. American Diabetes Association. 6 glycemic targets: Standards of medical care in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care
2019 ,42Suppl. 1, S61–S70. [CrossRef]
5. Grant, R.W.; Huang, E.S.; Wexler, D.J.; Laiteerapong, N.; Warton, M.E.; Mo et, H.H.; Karter, A.J. Patients
who self-monitor blood glucose and their unused testing results. Am. J. Manag. Care 2015 ,21, e119–e129.
6. Kerr, D.; Axelrod, C.; Hoppe, C.; Klono , D.C. Diabetes and technology in 2030: A utopian or dystopian
future? Diabetes Med. 2018 ,35, 498–503. [CrossRef]
7. Levine, B.J.; Close, K.L.; Gabbay, R.A. Reviewing U.S. Connected Diabetes Care: The Newest Member of the
Team. Diabetes Technol. Ther. 2020 ,22, 1–9. [CrossRef]
8. Fleming, G.A.; Petrie, J.R.; Bergenstal, R.M.; Holl, R.W.; Peters, A.L.; Heinemann, L. Diabetes Digital App
Technology: Beneﬁts, Challenges, and Recommendations. A Consensus Report by the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the American Diabetes Association (ADA) Diabetes Technology
Working Group. Diabetes Care 2020 ,43, 250–260. [CrossRef]
9. Glucome Solution Overview. Available online: https: //www.glucome.com /solution /overview (accessed on 25
January 2020).
10. Vietnam News. Smartphone Users Cover 84% of VN Population. Available online: https: //vietnamnews.vn /
economy /418482 /smartphone-users-cover-84-of-vn-population.html. (accessed on 25 January 2020).
11. American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Technology: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2019.
Diabetes Care 2019 ,42Suppl. 1, S71–S80. [CrossRef]
12. Xu, Y.; Tan, D.H.Y.; Lee, J.Y. Evaluating the impact of self-monitoring of blood glucose frequencies on glucose
control in patients with type 2 diabetes who do not use insulin: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J.
Clin. Pract. 2019 ,73, e13357. [CrossRef]
13. Young, L.A.; Buse, J.B.; Weaver, M.A.; Vu, M.B.; Mitchell, C.M.; Blakeney, T.; Grimm, K.; Rees, J.; Niblock, F.;
Donahue, K.E.; et al. Glucose Self-monitoring in Non-Insulin-Treated Patients with Type 2 Diabetes in
Primary Care Settings: A Randomized Trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 2017 ,177, 920–929. [CrossRef]
14. Lee, P .A.; Greenﬁeld, G.; Pappas, Y. The impact of telehealth remote patient monitoring on glycemic control
in type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of systematic reviews of randomised controlled
trials. BMC Health Serv. Res. 2018 ,18, 495. [CrossRef]
15. Sahin, C.; Courtney , K.L.; Naylor, P .J.E.; Rhodes, R. Tailored mobile text messaging interventions targeting type
2 diabetes self-management: A systematic review and a meta-analysis. Digit. Health 2019 ,22, 2055207619845279.
[CrossRef]
16. Kerr, D.; Klono , D.C. Digital Diabetes Data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Time for Humility Not Hubris.
J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. 2019 ,13, 123–127. [CrossRef]Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 937 11 of 11
17. Joubert, M.; Benhamou, P .Y .; Schaepelynck, P .; Hanaire, H.; Catargi, B.; Farret, A.; Fontaine, P .; Guerci, B.; Reznik, Y .;
Jeandidier, N.; et al. Remote Monitoring of Diabetes: A Cloud-Connected Digital System for Individuals With
Diabetes and Their Health Care Providers. J. Diabetes Sci. T echnol. 2019 ,13, 1161–1168. [CrossRef]
18. Mora, P .; Buskirk, A.; Lyden, M.; Parkin, C.G.; Borsa, L.; Petersen, B. Use of a Novel, Remotely Connected
Diabetes Management System Is Associated with Increased Treatment Satisfaction, Reduced Diabetes
Distress, and Improved Glycemic Control in Individuals with Insulin-Treated Diabetes: First Results from
the Personal Diabetes Management Study. Diabetes Technol. Ther. 2017 ,19, 715–722. [CrossRef]
19. Bollyky, J.B.; Melton, S.T.; Xu, T.; Painter, S.L.; Knox, B. The Effect of a Cellular-Enabled Glucose Meter on
Glucose Control for Patients with Diabetes: Prospective Pre-Post Study . JMIR Diabetes 2019 ,7, e14799. [CrossRef]
20. Whaley, C.M.; Bollyky, J.B.; Lu, W.; Painter, S.; Schneider, J.; Zhao, Z.; He, X.; Johnson, J.; Meadows, E.S.
Reduced medical spending associated with increased use of a remote diabetes management program and
lower mean blood glucose values. J. Med. Econ. 2019 ,22, 869–877. [CrossRef]
21. Pradeepa, R.; Rajalakshmi, R.; Mohan, V . Use of Telemedicine Technologies in Diabetes Prevention and
Control in Resource-Constrained Settings: Lessons Learned from Emerging Economies. Diabetes Technol.
Ther. 2019 ,21, S29–S216. [CrossRef]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).