DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES
 IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS
BRIEFING PAPERDIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES
 IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS
BRIEFING PAPER
by
Nikola M. Trendov, Samuel Varas, and Meng Zeng 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Rome, 2019iiiCONTENTS
1 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1 The digital agriculture revolution  ........................................................ 1
1.2 Digital divide  ........................................................................... 2
1.3 Conditions for a digital transformation  ................................................. 2
2 BASIC CONDITIONS FOR DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1 IT infrastructure and networks in rural areas  ........................................... 3
 2.1.1 Challenges  ............................................................................... 3
2.2 Educational attainment, digital literacy and employment in rural areas  ............... 4
 2.2.1 Challenges  ............................................................................... 4
2.3 Policies and programmes for enabling digital agriculture  .............................. 4
 2.3.1 Challenges  ............................................................................... 6
3 ENABLERS FOR DIGITAL AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.1 Use of digital technologies among rural populations and farmers  ..................... 7
3.2 Digital skills among rural populations  .................................................. 8
3.3 Digital agripreneurial and innovation culture  .......................................... 8
 3.3.1 Challenges  ............................................................................... 9
4 EXAMPLES AND IMPACT OF THE USE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES  
 IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.1 Challenges to connect marginalized and remote communities  ........................ 14
5.2 Drivers and demands for unlocking digital agriculture transformation  ................ 15
5.3 Future work  ........................................................................... 16
6 REFERENCES   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17ivFigures
FIGURE 1  Subscriber penetration and smartphone adoption (%) by region, 2018.  ...................... 4
FIGURE 2.  Higher education attendance by degree of urbanization  ..................................... 5
FIGURE 3.  Governmental services provided via email, Short Message Service (SMS)  
or Really Simple Syndication (RSS) (% of countries in each region), 2018.  ..................... 6
FIGURE 4.  Average proportion of the population in rural and urban areas with a specific  
digital skill, 2017.  ............................................................................. 8
FIGURE 5. Social media preferences among agriculture and food stakeholders (%), 2016.  ............. 1511 INTRODUCTION AND 
BACKGROUND
The agriculture and food sector is facing multiple 
challenges. With the global population projected to grow 
from 7.6 billion in 2018 (UN DESA, 2019) to over 9.6 
billion in 2050 there will be a significant increase in the 
demand for food (UN DESA, 2017). At the same time, 
the availability of natural resources such as fresh water 
and productive arable land is becoming increasingly 
constrained. 
Production is not the only concern; although agricultural 
output is currently enough to feed the world, 821 million 
people still suffer from hunger (FAO, 2018). Processes 
such as the rapid rate of urbanization are also having 
important implications for patterns of food production 
and consumption.
The agrifood sector remains critical for livelihoods 
and employment. There are more than 570 million 
smallholder farms worldwide (Lowder et al., 2016) and 
agriculture and food production accounts for 28% of the 
entire global workforce (ILOSTAT, 2019).
Achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goal of 
a ‘world with zero hunger’ by 2030 will require more 
productive, efficient, sustainable, inclusive, transparent 
and resilient food systems (FAO, 2017b p. 140). This will 
require an urgent transformation of the current agrifood 
system.
Digital innovations and technologies may be part of the 
solution. The so-called ‘Fourth Industrial Revolution’ 
(Industry 4.0)1 is seeing several sectors rapidly 
transformed by ‘disruptive’ digital technologies such as 
Blockchain, Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence and 
Immerse Reality. In the agriculture and food sector, the 
spread of mobile technologies, remote-sensing services 
and distributed computing are already improving 
smallholders’ access to information, inputs, market, 
1 The term Industry 4.0 originated in Germany where it was applied 
to rapid transformations in the design, manufacture, operation 
and service of manufacturing systems and products (European 
Parliament, 2015a)finance and training. Digital technologies are creating 
new opportunities to integrate smallholders in a digitally-
driven agrifood system (USAID, 2018). 
The next period of growth in mobile connections is 
expected to come mainly from rural communities. Already, 
70% of the poorest 20% in developing countries have 
access to mobile phones (World Bank, 2016). Additionally, 
more than 40% of the global population has internet access 
and there are major initiatives to connect those in rural 
areas of developing countries (World Bank, 2016).
However, there are challenges to consider in the 
‘digitalization’ of agriculture and food value chain. The 
transformation must be done carefully in order to avoid 
an increase of a ‘digital divide’ between economies 
and sectors and between those with differing abilities 
to adopt new technologies (OECD, nd). In emerging 
economies and rural areas, weak technological 
infrastructure, high costs of technology, low levels of 
e-literacy and digital skills, weak regulatory framework 
and limited access to services mean these areas risk being 
left behind in the digitalization process.
Yet, developing economies may also have the advantage 
of being able to ‘leapfrog’ older agrifood technologies and 
models in favour of a digital agriculture revolution. This 
new scenario will require radical rethinking by policy 
makers, international organizations, business leaders and 
individuals: ‘business as usual’ is not the solution.
1.1 The digital agriculture 
revolution
Historically, agriculture has undergone a series of 
revolutions that have driven efficiency, yield and 
profitability to previously unattainable levels. Market 
forecasts for the next decade suggest a ‘digital agricultural 
revolution’ will be the newest shift which could help 
ensure agriculture meets the needs of the global 
population into the future.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER2Digitalization will change every part of the agrifood 
chain. Management of resources throughout the system 
can become highly optimized, individualized, intelligent 
and anticipatory. It will function in real time in a 
hyper-connected way, driven by data. Value chains will 
become traceable and coordinated at the most detailed 
level whilst different fields, crops and animals can be 
accurately managed to their own optimal prescriptions. 
Digital agriculture will create systems that are highly 
productive, anticipatory and adaptable to changes such as 
those caused by climate change. This, in turn, could lead 
to greater food security, profitability and sustainability.
In the context of the Sustainable Development Goals, 
digital agriculture has the potential to deliver economic 
benefits through increased agricultural productivity, cost 
efficiency and market opportunities, social and cultural 
benefits through increased communication and inclusivity 
and environmental benefits through optimized resource 
use as well as adaptation to climate change.
The potential benefits of digitalizing the agrifood sector 
are convincing but it will require major transformations 
of farming systems, rural economies, communities and 
natural resource management. This will be a challenge 
and requires a systematic and holistic approach to 
achieve the full potential benefits.
1.2 Digital divide
Digitalization of the agrifood system involves the risk 
that the potential benefits will be unequally distributed between rural and urban areas, gender, youth population. 
Urban areas often have better developed ‘digital 
ecosystems’ (resources, skills, networks) compared with 
rural areas. Combined with global trends of urbanization 
and middle and rich classes settling in cities, there is 
potential for digitalization to exacerbate existing rural-
urban disparities (UN DESA, 2018a) and populations to 
fall behind in the process of a digital transformation. FAO 
is committed to assist governments and partners bridging 
such multidisciplinary digital divides to ensure that 
everyone benefits from the emerging digital society.
1.3 Conditions for a digital 
transformation
There are several conditions that will shape the digital 
transformation of agriculture in different contexts:
 zBasic conditions are the minimum conditions 
required to use technology and include: availability, 
connectivity, affordability, ICT in education and 
supportive policies and programmes (e-government) 
for digital strategies;
 zEnabling conditions (‘enablers’) are factors that 
further facilitate the adoption of technologies: use 
of internet, mobile phones and social media, digital 
skills and support for agripreneurial and innovation 
culture (talent development, sprint programmes 
including hackathons, incubators and accelerator 
programmes).32 BASIC CONDITIONS 
FOR DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATION
There are some basic conditions that must exist for 
the use of digital technologies and therefore for digital 
transformation of the agriculture and food sector. 
These include: infrastructure and connectivity (mobile 
subscriptions, network coverage, internet access, and 
electricity supply), affordability, educational attainment 
(literacy, ICT education) and institutional support.
Access to digital technology can offer significant 
advantages to smallholder farmers and other rural 
business by providing links to suppliers and information 
and allowing users to tap into workforce talent, build 
strategic partnership, access support services such as 
training, finance and legal services and, critically, reach 
markets and customers. 
However, the introduction of digital technologies in 
rural areas can be a challenge. Around the world, 
rural populations are declining and education and 
employment opportunities are limited. There is often a 
lack of infrastructure, including basic IT infrastructure, 
particularly in very remote rural communities and those 
with large indigenous populations. The costs associated 
with IT infrastructure present a major challenge in rural 
areas where rates of poverty are often high, especially 
in developing countries and least-developed countries 
(LDCs). 
2.1 IT infrastructure and 
networks in rural areas
In the era of digitalization, Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) such as mobile 
phones and computers have revolutionized how people 
access knowledge and information, do business and use 
services. Yet there remain significant digital divides both 
within and between countries (European Parliament, 
2015b).2.1.1  CHALLENGES
Globally, mobile cellular subscriptions have been 
growing over recent years. Between 2013 and 2018 there 
were 1 billion new mobile subscribers and 67% of the 
world population is now subscribed to mobile services 
(GSMA, 2018c; 2019a). Much of this recent growth 
has been driven by countries in Africa and Asia and 
the Pacific. Access to computers and internet has also 
been increasing in LDCs and developing economies. 
Yet 3.8 billion people still remain offline and are 
disproportionately located in rural and remote areas 
(GSMA, 2018c).
One challenge is that network coverage in rural areas 
remains limited. Despite 4G becoming the most common 
mobile connection globally and 90% of being able to 
access the internet through 3G or higher quality network, 
only around a third of rural populations in LDCs receive 
coverage by 3G networks (GSMA, 2019a). 
Smartphones have become a major way for consumers to 
access internet. Falling handset prices and innovations 
such as pay-as-you-go plans mean that mobile devices 
are increasingly affordable and accessible, including for 
rural communities (Hahn and Kibora, 2008). Among 
the world’s poorest households, 7 out of 10 have a 
mobile phone and more households in LDCs (ITU, 
2018). However, these are not always web-enabled 
smartphones.
Although the growth of smartphone ownership and 
use of mobile broadband has been faster in developing 
countries than developed countries in recent years, there 
are still twice as many mobile-broadband subscriptions 
per 100 inhabitants in developed countries as in 
developing countries (Figure 1). Affordability is the main 
barrier to smartphone ownership in LDCs where a basic 
mobile broadband plan still corresponds to over 60% of 
gross national income per capita on average (ITU, 2017). DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER42.2 Educational attainment, 
digital literacy and 
employment in rural areas
The use of digital technologies requires basic literacy 
and numeracy as well as special technical knowledge 
and skills. People without such competencies can end up 
marginalized in increasingly digitally driven societies. 
2.2.1  CHALLENGES 
In rural areas, a lack of infrastructure and resources often 
limits the quality of education. This leads to less effective 
learning, lower attendance rates and early school leaving. 
Additionally, in many rural areas, youth are often 
required to work which leaves little time for school.
Rates of educational attainment are therefore often 
lower in rural areas than urban areas, especially in 
LDCs (see Figure 2). Despite the fact that 60% of the 
countries for which data are available have eradicated or 
nearly eradicated youth illiteracy, literacy remains low 
in many rural areas of LDCs and particularly among 
women (UNESCO, 2017). A lack of basic literacy and 
numeracy presents a significant barrier to using digital 
technologies.
In addition, ‘digital literacy’ is critical for using digital 
technologies. Unlike in many developed countries, 
where students regularly use advanced technologies and 
digital skills in their education and day-to-day lives, ICT 
knowledge and skills lag behind in LDCs. In many LDCs 
and developing countries, basic computer courses are not 
integrated in primary or secondary education due to a 
lack of interest from governments and the private sector to invest in building new digital skills rather than hiring 
already skilled labour.
A lack of digital tools, such as tablets and laptops, in 
schools is identified by teachers as a major obstacle to 
IT education (European Commission, 2019). There is 
also a lack of relevant skills among teachers. This tends 
to be particularly true in rural areas. For schools in 
urban areas, access to the internet and online learning 
resources is usually commonplace. However, rural and 
remote schools often lack access to internet. This pattern 
is true even in developed countries, but is particularly 
pronounced in developing countries and LDCs.
Over the next 15 years, around 1.6 billion people in 
developing countries and LDCs will reach working 
age. Creating the necessary jobs while sustaining 
existing employment will be a significant challenge, 
especially for the agrifood sector (World Bank, 
2017). Rural unemployment is particularly high 
and disproportionately affects youth and women. 
The agricultural sector remains a major source of 
livelihoods in rural areas. Digitalization of the sector will 
significantly alter the nature of work and the demand for 
labour and skills. Increasingly, digital literacy will be a 
requirement in agrifood jobs and suitable education and 
training will be required. 
2.3 Policies and programmes 
for enabling digital 
agriculture
In many countries, government policies and frameworks 
are one of the driving forces behind digitalization. 
These create an enabling environment for competitive 
digital markets and e-services. There is also a trend 
towards governments themselves deploying e-services 
– ‘e-government’ – especially in health, education, 
environment, and employment.
However, designing and managing a digital government 
program requires a high level of administrative capacity 
and as a result some countries have had limited success 
(Fakhoury, 2018). Developing countries are often the 
ones with the least capacity to manage the process. 
Success also varies by sector and, in many countries, the 
agricultural sector – a major employer in rural areas – 
lags behind.
There is a lack of published research on government 
digitalization policies, but information can be inferred 
from proxies including the extent to which governments 
provide e-services and their policies regarding 
connectivity and data. Figure 1  Subscriber penetration and smartphone 
adoption (%) by region, 2018.
Source: GSMA, 2019a.
67
66
80
85
67
64
83
4560
54
53
72
65
52
80
36Subscriber penetration %
World
Asia-Pacific
CIS
Europe
Latin America
MENA
North-America
Sub-Saharan AfricaSmart phone adoption %
World
Asia-Pacific
CIS
Europe
Latin America
MENA
North-America
Sub-Saharan Africa5 CHAPTER 2  BASIC CONDITIONS FOR DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
Rural UrbanFigure 2.  Higher education attendance by degree of urbanization.
Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2018.
Cyprus
Greece
Ireland
Bulgaria
Belgium
Croatia
Serbia
France
Romania
Lithuania
Austria
Spain
Italy
Latvia
United Kingdom
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Poland
Hungary
Sweden
Denmark
Nepal
North Macedonia
Georgia
Moldova
Montenegro
Ukraine
Czech Republic
Mongolia
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Chile
Luxembourg
Armenia
Finland
Germany
Kyrgyz Republic
Viet Nam
Panama
Kazakhstan
Bolivia
Jordan
Colombia
Barbados
Albania
Peru
Norway
China
Tajikistan
Switzerland
Tunisia
Thailand
Costa Rica
Iceland
Egypt
Philippines
Mexico
Sudan
Cambodia
Lao PDR
Uruguay
El Salvador
JamaicaDominican Republic
Azerbaijan
Indonesia
Myanmar
Namibia
Brazil
Honduras
Belize
Nicaragua
Ethiopia
Syrian Arab Republic
Pakistan
Kenya
Guatemala
Iraq
Afghanistan
Lesotho
Nigeria
Uganda
Cameroon
Togo
Uzbekistan
Yemen
Bhutan
Suriname
Timor-Leste
Djibouti
Guinea
Gabon
Guyana
Comoros
Zimbabwe
Morocco
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Eswatini
Gambia
Mauritania
Madagascar
Benin
Haiti
Rwanda
Mali
Malawi
Sierra Leone
Bangladesh
Ghana
Zambia
Cote d’Ivoire
Liberia
St.Lucia
Maldives
South Sudan
Burkina Faso
India
Sao Tome and Principe
Burundi
Niger
Chad
Somalia
Senegal
Guinea-Bissau
Tanzania
Central African RepublicDIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER62.3.1  CHALLENGES
Compared with just a decade ago, governments have 
made significant progress in expanding ICT access 
and digital networks. Some developed countries are 
reaching near universal access through fixed and mobile 
connections whilst progress is being made in developing 
countries through the expansion of mobile services. 
Many governments have begun using e-services in 
sectors such as health and education (Figure 3). However, 
in LDCs and developing countries, many people cannot 
use e-services because they lack access to ICT due to 
low incomes, limited user capabilities and a lack of 
infrastructure (McKinsey & Co, 2014). As the pace of 
technological innovation intensifies, this is likely to limit 
further development of e-government in these countries.
The type of licensing framework and efficiency of 
spectrum allocation2 that governments use can be 
important in encouraging the private sector to invest 
in mobile networks in remote areas. The experience 
of EU countries suggests that greater liberalization of 
the telecommunications sector supports widespread 
connectivity. Efficient spectrum management can 
also favour mobile network operators through lower 
deployment costs which will bring to end user in terms  
of greater access to ICT services.
Development of government e-services has often been 
particularly slow in the agricultural sector and few 
2 Spectrum allocation refers to the radio frequencies allocated to 
the mobile industry and other sectors for communication over the 
airwaves (GSMA, 2019b)countries provide e-Agriculture services. Those countries 
that do prioritize the use of ICT in agriculture also 
generally have a better business environment and policy 
and regulation framework for agribusiness. It is possible 
this is linked to the use of ICT as it does not seem to 
be related to levels of education, literacy or agricultural 
contribution to GDP in a country.
So far, developed countries are leading on implementing 
national level strategies on digital agriculture. In some 
cases, this is by integrating the agrifood sector as a key 
focus within existing national digital strategies that aim 
to transform wider industry and society. In developing 
countries, most of the e-Agriculture services are 
embedded within e-government or ICT strategies where 
the main objective is to provide basic e-Agriculture 
services such as early alert notifications and general 
information. 
The use of digital technologies will create the need for 
policy and regulation in relation to the data that will be 
generated. A lack of standardization in the format and 
ownership of data could create disparities, particularly 
in a scenario where large international companies are 
pursuing digital agriculture for agribusiness whilst 
smallholders and local agripreneurs are simultaneously 
using technologies to tackle societal challenges in rural 
and farming areas.
Figure 3.  Governmental services provided via email, Short Message Service (SMS) or Really Simple 
Syndication (RSS) (% of countries in each region), 2018. 
Source: UN DESA, 2018
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Oceania Africa Americas Asia Europe 
Education Health Labour Environment Social protection73 ENABLERS FOR  
DIGITAL AGRICULTURE 
TRANSFORMATION
In addition to basic conditions, there are important 
enablers that facilitate digital agricultural transformation. 
Three key enablers are: the use of internet and mobile 
and social networks among farmers and agricultural 
extension officers, digital skills among the rural 
population and a culture which encourages digital 
agripreneurship and innovation.
With the rise of high speed internet connections and 
web-enabled smartphones, mobile apps, social media, 
VoIP3 and digital engagement platforms have significant 
potential to improve access to information and services 
for those in rural areas. However, many small-scale 
farmers in developing countries remain isolated from 
digital technologies and lack the skills to use them.
Establishing a ‘digital agriculture ecosystem’ requires 
an enabling environment for innovation by farmers and 
agripreneurs. Already, there is increasing funding and 
collaboration on digital agriculture projects and start-
ups are beginning to attract international investors and 
media attention. Youth have a particular role to play in 
this process. They often have the advantage of digital 
literacy and the capacity for innovative solutions. When 
digital topics are integrated in educational programs they 
can also gain an understanding of the uses of digital tools 
and the skills to create them.
3.1 Use of digital technologies 
among rural populations 
and farmers
Literacy and digital skills and the availability of 
technologies all affect the use of digital innovations. 
3  Voice over Internet Platforms or phone services over the internetHowever, the most critical component for unlocking the 
possibilities of digital technologies use is access to the 
internet. 
Although almost half of the world’s population is now 
using the internet, this is disproportionately in developed 
nations. In LDCs, only one out of seven people uses the 
internet (ITU, 2016) and there are apparent disparities 
between rural and urban areas (although the patterns 
vary between countries).
Education and income levels are strong determinants 
of how (and if) people use the internet. Those with 
higher levels of education tend to use more advanced 
services, such as e-commerce and online financial and 
governmental services. Users with lower education 
levels tend to use the internet predominantly for 
communication and entertainment.
In rural areas, where education and literacy rates are 
generally lower, mobile phones tend to be used mainly 
for communication and social media. This presents 
a challenge for the introduction of digital agriculture 
applications which require more advanced digital skills.
Low overall smartphone ownership in rural areas 
combined with the high cost of internet and limited 
network coverage also present challenges to the use of 
mobile agricultural applications and limit the scope to 
use social networks like Facebook to facilitate agricultural 
support and information flows between farmers. Such 
availability of information could support farmers to 
make better farming decisions which could contribute 
to increasing yields, reduced environmental impacts and 
improved livelihoods.
The diversity of available technologies and the lack of 
standardisation and compatibility between them, for DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER8example for the exchange of data, also create a barrier to 
use by farmers. The adaptability of technologies is limited 
and it is often not possible to integrate machinery from 
different brands so farmers must decide which brand to 
invest in. There is a lack of independent advisory services 
to support farmers in making these decisions.
3.2 Digital skills among rural 
populations
Digitalization creates demand for digital skills and for 
people who are competent in using digital devices, 
understanding outputs and developing programmes and 
applications. This requires not only basic literacy and 
numeracy but also data handling and communication 
skills. In populations where such skills are lacking, 
education must improve quickly; ICT is developing at an 
incredibly rapid pace and rates of learning must keep up 
( U N DP, 2015).
Alongside investment in technology, there is therefore 
a growing need for investment in the development of 
multidisciplinary digital skills and knowledge. This 
is true in both developed and developing countries. 
Countries that have ICT education programmes, can 
afford digital tools and have good access to the internet 
will have better digital skills. 
In the agrifood sector, the digital transformation will 
change the structure of the labour market and the 
nature of work. It will redefine the role of farmers and 
agripreneurs and alter the skill set required in the 
agrifood sector. It may also transform how and where 
people work and is likely to affect female and male workers differently due to differences in digital skills and 
technology use. Rural areas in particular lag behind in 
the process of gaining digital skills (Figure 4). There is a 
need to develop a model of digital skills training aimed 
at farmers so they can learn to assess and implement the 
best practices and technologies for their farm business. 
3.3 Digital agripreneurial and 
innovation culture
Digital entrepreneurship involves the transformation of 
existing businesses through novel digital technologies 
and the creation of new innovative enterprises 
characterized by: the use of digital technologies 
to improve business operations, the invention of 
new (digital) business models and engaging with 
customers and stakeholders through new (digital) 
channels (European Commission, 2013). Globally, 
there are an increasing number of initiatives to foster 
digital entrepreneurial activity related to the creation, 
development and scaling-up of ‘digital start-ups’, 
including in the agriculture and food sector. 
Modern day farmers may be particularly suited to 
entrepreneurial activities. These days, farmers often 
design business plans, scout for funding, make use of 
farming enterprise ‘incubators’ and attend scientific 
conferences. Youth farmers in particular are also more 
likely to take risks in their farm management. In Italy, for 
example, over 12 000 agricultural start-ups were created in 
2013 by men and women aged 25 to 30 (Coldiretti, 2018). 
Developed countries are so far the leaders in establishing 
an entrepreneurial culture, but less developed countries 
Figure 4.  Average proportion of the population in rural and urban areas with a specific digital skill, 2017. 
Source: ITU, 2018.
Urban RuralCopying or 
moving a file 
or folderSending 
emails with 
attached filesTransferring 
files between 
a computer 
and other 
devicesUsing copy 
and paste 
toolsFinding, 
downloading, 
installing and 
configuring 
softwareUsing basic 
arithmetic 
formulas in a 
spreadsheetCreating 
electronic 
presentationsConnecting 
and installing 
new devicesWriting a 
computer 
program60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%9 CHAPTER 3  ENABLERS FOR DIGITAL AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION
such as Rwanda, Zambia, Turkey and Armenia are also 
rapidly pursuing these opportunities in the digital age. 
3.3.1  CHALLENGES
Entrepreneurship presents a promising option for 
development and business in rural communities. 
With its large farming sector and consumer market, 
Africa is anticipated to be a major testing ground for 
digital solutions by agritech groups (Figure 5). At the 
beginning of 2018, there were 82 agritech start-ups 
operating across Africa with over half launching in the 
previous two years (Disrupt Africa, 2018).
However, despite the rapid growth of digital agricultural 
technologies, most ICT-enabled solutions have yet to be 
demonstrated at scale. Companies – especially SMEs and 
small start-ups – often struggle to move from the stage 
of application development to fully realized businesses. 
One challenge is that there is a lack of guidance for 
entrepreneurs on scaling strategies in under-served 
markets.
To encourage digital agripreneurship, companies need to 
create pools of digitally-skilled employees. This involves 
finding potential employees with relevant skills and 
identifying how they can be attracted and retained, as 
well as recognizing talent that can be nurtured within 
the existing employee base and investing in developing 
digital skills in existing roles.
Education is the most critical factor to accelerating 
innovation and digital transformation. Governments need to adopt a three-pronged approach to stimulating 
research and development (R&D) and innovation 
education: investing in R&D, amplifying indigenous 
R&D and working with a broad coalition of partners to 
redesign education to emphasize e-learning tools, do-it-
yourself hands-on learning, rewards for experimentation, 
critical thinking, and digital and financial literacy and 
software skills.
Youth agripreneurs have a key role to play in the 
digitalization of the agricultural sector. They have unique 
insights from listening to the experiences of their parents 
and grandparents and observing missed opportunities. 
Start-ups from smallholder farming communities often 
draw inspiration from, and are aimed at helping, the 
farming communities where the creators grew up. Youth 
will need sprint programmes and financial support to 
penetrate the agripreneur market. Such programmes 
attract investment and create opportunities for investors 
and start-ups to form collaborations.
The existence of an entrepreneurial culture is often 
not related to the GDP or location of a country. The 
accessibility of e-commerce and digital platforms is 
making it increasingly easy for it to develop anywhere. 
Nevertheless, creating a sustainable digital agripreneurial 
culture is a long-term political and practical process, 
starting with appropriate education in schools. It requires 
an enabling environment which allows risk-taking, 
trust-based relationships between stakeholders, financial 
opportunities, professional services, a sustainable digital 
ecosystem4, the availability of appropriate skills and an 
attitude of sharing or ‘open innovation’.
4 A digital ecosystem is an interdependent collection of enterprises, 
people and/or things that share standardised digital platformsDIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER10
114 EXAMPLES AND IMPACT 
OF THE USE OF DIGITAL 
TECHNOLOGIES IN 
AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS
Digital transformation has the potential to deliver 
significant economic, social and environmental benefits. 
The following examples demonstrate how digital 
technologies can be applied to improve the efficiency and 
functioning of agrifood systems:
 zThe use of mobile applications providing price 
information to farmers can reduce market distortions 
and help farmers to plan production processes. For 
example, the M-Farm application in Kenya led to 
farmers changing their cropping patterns and some 
reported receiving higher prices at market as a result 
(Baumüller, 2015); zAgricultural robots  (‘agrobots’) are seen as a key 
trend that will deeply influence agriculture in the 
future. Field agrobots are already being deployed 
to help farmers measure, map and optimize water 
and irrigation use. Fleets of small lightweight robots 
are now seen as a replacement for traditional high 
mass tractors, allowing a gradual reduction of 
compaction, re-aeration of the soil and benefits to 
soil function;
EMA-I APP  
ANIMAL HEALTH SYSTEM SUPPORT  
BY FAO
EMA-i is an early warning app developed by FAO 
to facilitate quality and real time livestock disease 
reporting captured by animal health workers in 
the field. EMA-i is integrated in the FAO’s Global 
Animal Disease Information System (EMPRES-i) 
where data are safely stored and used by countries. 
EMA-i is easily adaptable to countries existing 
livestock disease reporting system. By supporting 
surveillance and real time reporting capacities 
at country level and improving communication 
between stakeholders, EMA-i contributes to 
enhance early warning and response to animal 
disease occurrence with high impact to food 
security and livelihood. EMA-i is currently used 
in six countries in Africa (Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, 
Guinea, Lesotho, Tanzania and Zimbabwe).DINO AGROBOT FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND VITICULTURE
The Naïo Technologies team developed 
agricultural robot to improve working conditions 
and profitability for farmers.
To help farmers tackle the increasing regulations 
on phytosanitary products, the growing concerns 
with pesticides, and the lack of workers in the 
agricultural sector, Dino provides a new and 
effective solution. The Dino weeding robot allows 
vegetable farmers to manage crop weeding with 
a high level of precision, while helping them save 
time all through the season. 
Dino is highly effective to weed vegetables that 
are grown in the field, both in raised vegetable 
beds and in rows, such as lettuce, carrots, onions, 
etc. 
https:/ /www.naio-technologies.com/en/
agricultural-equipment/large-scale-vegetable-
weeding-robot/DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER12 zTechnologies can also support farmers to anticipate 
and respond to pest attacks, crop failures and climatic 
changes through timely weather-based agro-advisory 
messages;
 zPrecision Agriculture (PA) is an example of an 
application of the Internet of Things (IoT) in 
agriculture. The use of Guidance Systems during 
planting and fertilizer application can lead to cost 
savings in terms of seed, fertilizer and tractor fuel, 
and can reduce working hours in the field. Variable 
Rate Technologies (VRT) and drones (UAV) can also 
reduce water and pesticide use and reduce labour and 
resource costs;
 zThe importance of ERP software in agriculture 
is high, as it has the potential to help streamline 
every process, from procurement to production 
to and distribution. ERP can enable a farm (or 
related business) to respond more organically 
to environmental challenges, adjust systems 
accordingly, and grow into a more cost-efficient 
businesses; zOver the last few years, the growth in Artificial 
Intelligence technology (AI) has strengthened agro-
based businesses to run more efficiently. Companies 
that use AI helps farmers to scan their fields and 
monitor every stage of the production cycle. AI 
technology is transforming the agricultural sector, 
as farmers can depend on the data that satellite 
or UAV record to determine the state of the farm 
rather than walking all the distance. AI can improve 
resource use, support early decision making through 
predictive models and maintain 24/7 monitoring 
systems;
 zTechnologies such as Blockchain have also been 
shown to deliver benefits. For example, Blockchain 
has been successfully used to detect poor quality 
food in food chains allowing early and effective 
responses. It can also provide consumers with 
information on the origin of their food, generating a 
competitive advantage for those who use it.ALIBABA GROUP HOLDING AND JD.
COM LAUNCHES SMART BRAIN FOR 
PIG FARMS
Alibaba’s “ET Agricultural Brain” is an AI 
programme that uses facial, temperature and 
voice recognition to assess each pig’s health. The 
technology can tell whether a sow is pregnant 
by following its sleeping and standing positions 
as well as eating habits, and has been already 
adopted by a number of leading pig farms in 
China. With AI they are able to detect sick hogs 
and minimize accidents, such as protecting 
piglets from accidents through the introduction 
of voice recognition technology. Multiple meters 
are installed to collect data to optimize the 
environment for the herd to grow, as well as 
reducing human errors in the farming process.
Using AI, pig farms will reduce pig farmers’ 
labour costs in the range of 30 percent to 50 
percent, and lower the need for feed, as well as 
shorten hogs’ lifespan by five to eight days by 
optimizing animals’ growth conditions, based 
on the firm’s estimate. China could save CNY50 
billion (US$7 .5 billion) if it applied the system to 
all pig farms nationwide.
https:/ /www.yicaiglobal.com/news/chinese-
aging-farms-step-into-ai-era-with-facial-
recognition-for-pigs-MYCROP  
COMPLETE FARM AND FARMER 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
MyCrop a technology-enabled initiative for 
farmers, which empowers them through 
delivering information, expertise and resources, 
to increase productivity and profitability, hence 
improving standard of living. It is a collaborative 
platform that strives to combine cutting edge 
technology (Big Data, machine learning, 
smartphones/tablets, etc.), innovative business 
model (agriculture platform as a service), and 
focused human efforts (agriculture insights, 
products, and services) to serve smallholder 
farmers.
MyCrop facilitates farmers in taking and 
executing optimum decisions by providing geo-
mapping, crop planning, individual farm plans 
and farm automation customized for each farmer 
based on weather, soil, pest and crop data on an 
almost real-time basis.
MyCrop is a sustainable data-driven, scalable, 
intelligent, self-learning, real-time collaborative 
Agrifood system, which serves as a farm as well as 
farmer management solution, predictive analytics 
and monitoring tool, decision support system and 
agriculture (buy /sales side) e-commerce platform.
http:/ /www.mycrop.tech13CHAPTER 4  EXAMPLES AND IMPACT OF THE USE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS
WALMART TRACKS ITS LETTUCE  
FROM FARM TO BLOCKCHAIN
After a two-year pilot project, the retailer is 
using blockchain to keep track of every bag of 
spinach and head of lettuce. The giant retailer 
begin requiring lettuce and spinach suppliers 
to contribute to a blockchain database that can 
rapidly pinpoint contamination.
More than 100 farms that supply Walmart with 
leafy green vegetables will be required to input 
detailed information about their food into a 
blockchain database developed by IBM for 
Walmart and several other retailers exploring 
similar moves. 
For Walmart, the initiative fits squarely into 
two key strategies: bolstering its digital savvy 
and emphasizing the quality of its fresh food 
to customers. The blockchain could also save 
Walmart money. When another food-borne illness 
hits — like the E. coli  outbreak affecting romaine 
— the retailer would only have to discard the food 
that was actually at risk. 
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/business/
walmart-blockchain-lettuce.htmlThese technologies often require significant financial 
resources, large farm sizes and close integration with 
other technologies and agrifood chain processes. It is 
therefore a greater challenge for small-scale farmers 
to adopt such technologies, whereas as larger farmers 
and agribusiness companies will be more easily able to 
implement them.145 CONCLUSIONS AND 
FUTURE WORK
The digitalization of agriculture will cause a significant 
shift in farming and food production over the coming 
years. Potential environmental, economic and social 
benefits are significant, but there are also associated 
challenges. Disparities in access to digital technologies 
and services mean there is a risk of a digital divide. 
Smallholder famers and others in rural areas are 
particularly at risk of being left behind, not only in terms 
of e-literacy and access to digital resources but also in 
terms of productivity and aspects of economic and social 
integration. 
Simply introducing technologies is not enough to 
generate results. Social, economic and policy systems 
will need to provide the basic conditions and enablers 
for digital transformation. The “Law of Disruption” 
(Downes, 2009) states that technology changes 
exponentially, but economic and social systems change 
progressively and have trouble keeping up. Work is 
especially needed to ensure the necessary conditions for 
digital transformation are created in rural areas. 
5.1 Challenges to connect 
marginalized and remote 
communities
A well-developed digital infrastructure, especially in 
rural areas, is a precondition for digital agriculture 
and food systems. Although advances in technology 
and regulatory reform have improved access to ICT 
for people around the world, there still exists a digital 
divide. Just as a certain technology (e.g. dial-up Internet) 
becomes available across income levels, a new technology 
(e.g. broadband) appears, leaving users in developing 
countries ‘playing catch up’.
Although mobile-cellar subscriptions in the last five 
years were driven by countries in Africa and Asia and 
the Pacific, many people still do not own or use a mobile 
phone and the distribution of ownership is unequal. 
Access to web-enabled smartphones and fast 3G or 4G 
internet connections remains particularly limited in rural areas. There will need to be work to address this disparity 
and to facilitate smartphone ownership and use in areas 
where it is currently lacking.
Both literacy and education levels also remain particularly 
low for rural populations in developing countries and 
LDCs which presents a barrier to the use of digital 
technologies. Youth unemployment rates are often higher 
than the country average and this is especially the case 
in rural areas. Increasingly, employers want employees 
who are adept at using technology. A lack of e-literacy 
and digital skills in rural areas means these populations 
will fall behind in the modern labour market. There is a 
need for school curricula to incorporate digital subjects, 
for improved knowledge and skills among teachers 
and for increased availability of digital technologies in 
classrooms.
To unlock the full potential of digital agriculture 
transformation, governments need to create an enabling 
regulatory environment. Designing and managing 
digital government programmes requires a high level of 
administrative capacity which is beyond the capabilities 
of some countries, particularly LDCs and developing 
countries. Addressing the digital divide must be made 
a policy priority and governments should make the 
socioeconomic case for digitalization of smallholder 
farming both to the farmers, and to potential private 
sector investors and start-up businesses. There will need 
to be significant capacity building among governments in 
developing countries and LDCs to facilitate this change 
in policy and regulation.
There is increased interest in data-enabled farming 
and related services and many new entrants from the 
technology industry and start-ups. Vast data collection 
will drive the use of machine learning and AI and 
new models will need to be developed to make the 
data useful. So far, the information gathered is often 
insufficient to inform the comprehensive solutions and 
partnerships needed to transform smallholder farming 
into viable, sustainable digital businesses. There also 
need to be decisions about the ownership and use of data; 15CHAPTER 5  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Figure 5. Social media preferences among agriultural stakeholders (%), 2016. 
Source: Bhattacharjee and Saravanan, 2016.
Note: Includes 62 countries.70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Facebook Whatsapp Google+ Wikis Twitter Blogs YouTube
Social networksPercentage of respondentsmanufacturers collect data from their devices and have 
the opportunity to exploit them, but farmers are often 
reluctant to share their data without receiving something 
in return. 
Strategies for digital agricultural transformation in 
developing countries must combine IT infrastructure 
with social, organisational and policy change.
5.2 Drivers and demands for 
unlocking digital 
agriculture transformation
Access to the internet remains the most critical 
component for unlocking the possibilities of new 
technologies. Across the globe, smartphones dominate in 
terms of time spent online and could be a game changer 
in the agrifood sector in LDCs and developing countries. 
They create opportunities to access information and 
services through mobile applications, online videos and 
social media. Sites like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube 
present a cost-effective means of communication 
with, and among, smallholder farmers and other key 
agricultural stakeholders such as extension officers, 
agro-dealers, retailers, agricultural researchers and policy 
makers (Figure 6). 
Falling handset prices, increasing internet coverage 
and the growing youth population create significant 
opportunities for the use of mobile phones in agricultural 
areas. However, internet provision and smartphone 
ownership remain lower in developing countries, and 
particularly in rural areas, and there needs to be more 
research into the use of mobile internet and social media 
in rural communities.Additionally, not all farmers are quick to adopt ICT. Many 
lack the necessary knowledge to request or use services, 
especially as ICT applications in the agrifood sector 
are relatively new and many e-services are still being 
developed. It is critical that technologies are properly 
targeted; if they do not provide the information that 
farmers need, they will not be adopted. 
Digital skills and e-literacy remain a significant 
constraint to the use of new technologies and are 
particularly lacking in rural areas, especially in 
developing countries. The diversity of available digital 
technologies and a lack of standardisation also present 
a barrier to adoption. The choice of which technology 
to use is complex and there is a lack of advisory services 
to support farmers in these decisions. Education and 
supporting services must be improved to support the 
adoption of digital technologies.
Digital technology is already changing the dynamics of 
the agrifood sector but the process has so far not been 
systematic. Realising the full potential of digital farming 
will require collaboration of all players in the agricultural 
value chain. There is a need for a clear overview on the 
part of actors working in agrifood and digital products 
– including private sector, governments and other 
agencies – on how to exploit the opportunities of digital 
agriculture.
Farmers have a key role to play and digital technologies 
provide new opportunities for them to collaborate 
and innovate. There is also a growing group in the 
farming sector who have university degrees and 
specialisations in science and technology subjects. They 
are often skilled in experimentation and innovative 
thinking. Youth in the agrifood sector are also often 
entrepreneurial and willing to take calculated risks to 
pursue new enterprises. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER16 -  20.00  40.00  60.00  80.00  100.00  120.00Swaz ilandM a l aw iBurkina FasoGuyanaChadMaliTan zaniaAfghanista nBurundiMoz ambiqueZimba bweSier ra  LeoneZ a mb i aCongo, D e mocra tic RepublicMauritaniaT o goUgandaGuineaSudanNigerLiberiaGabonNamibiaBeninSenega lGambiaCote d'Iv oireAngolaHaitiKyr gyzs tanPapua New  GuineaCongoHondurasCabo Ve r deNigeriaIra nMada gascarEl Salv adorCamer oonP a k i s t anLaosTrinidad a nd Tobag oVanuatuIra qEthiopi aCambodiaBhutanSolomo n IslandsBahamasNicar aguaSaint Luc iaSamoaL i b yaBotsw anaGhanaKenyaIndiaKaza khstanAlgeriaBoliviaBru nei Dar ussalamGeor giaMauritiusM y an m a rNepalSri LankaTaj ikistanUkraineUzbek istanVietnamIndones iaA z er b a i j anCosta R ic aBanglade shBar badosPhilippine sRwandaPe ruArgentinaBeliz eBosnia  and Herzegov inaB r az i lChileColombiaCze ch RepublicEcua dorE s t on i aGer manyGuatemalaHungaryJam aicaLatv iaMala ysiaMex icoMongo liaPanamaPar aguayPortugalRussia n Feder ationSlova kiaT i m or - L es t eT o ng aUr u guayVenez uelaYemenFijiAlbaniaLes othoLithuan iaMonte negr oChinaMac edoniaMor occoTha ilandTurkeyArme niaAus triaCanadaCr oatiaCyprusDominica n RepublicEgyptFinlan dGre eceHong KongIcelan dIr elandIsr aelItalyJor danKor ea, SouthLeba nonMaltaM o l d ov aNew Z ealandNor wayOmanSaudi ArabiaSe rbiaSlove niaS w e d enSwitz erlandTuni siaUnited Kingdo mUnited States  of Amer icaLux embourgSouth AfricaAustraliaDenmar kNetherlandsFr anceSpainRomaniaBahr ainBelar usBelgiumBulgariaJap anKuwaitPolandQatarSingapo r eUnited Ar ab Emir atesThere is a need for greater support for agripreneurial 
activities such as: business courses in agriculture, ICT 
curricula in education, increased capacity and support 
for innovation hubs and incubators, increased availability 
of venture capital (especially mid-level financing 
needed for scaling) and creation of a more favourable 
business environment. Because the real impact is from 
the businesses they create, and the amount and kind of 
employment that their SMEs or digital farms create.
5.3 Future work
Much work is needed in the area of digitalization in 
agriculture and rural areas. There are some key factors to 
be considered in this work.
Firstly, a significant challenge in understanding digital 
agricultural transformation is a lack of systematic, official 
data on the topic. Much of the data – for example on 
levels of e-literacy – are only available at the country level 
with no distinction for urban and rural areas. Meanwhile, 
data on networks focus only on coverage and do not 
provide information about the quality or affordability 
of services. There is also a lack of information about 
government support and regulatory frameworks for 
digital transformation; so far, this has been interpreted 
via proxies including the availability of government 
e-services and regulations about connectivity and data 
protection.
A second consideration is that there are significant 
disparities in the adoption of digital agriculture 
technologies between developed and developing 
countries and between global companies and those at 
a local, community or family scale. Factors including 
financial resources and education levels influence 
the adoption of modern agricultural technologies. 
Small farmers in rural areas are disproportionately 
disadvantaged as well as facing problems of limited 
access to infrastructure, networks and technology. A final factor to consider is that digital agricultural 
technologies are affected by economies of scale. Adoption 
is easier for users who can implement them at large scale. 
Small-scale farmers face a disadvantage compared to 
large agribusiness actors. This creates disparity between 
large and small-scale farmers, with a corresponding 
inequality between developed and developing countries. 
Transformative digital innovations and technologies are 
often not designed for the scale at which smallholder 
farmers operate.
Some specific priorities for future work are:
 zFacilitating the collection of better data about digital 
technologies and digitalisation at the regional and 
population level, particularly to show differentiated 
information about urban and rural areas;
 zCreation of sustainable business models that provide 
viable digital solutions for  inclusion of small-scale 
farmers in the digital agriculture transformation 
process;
 zCreation of an index to consider the development 
of digital agriculture in the context of cultural, 
educational and institutional dimensions of a given 
country, both in terms of the availability of basic 
conditions and enablers for digitalization and the 
potential economic, social and environmental impacts 
of the process. This could involve further development 
of a Digital Agriculture Readiness Index, expanding 
on previous work by the FAO Regional Office for 
Europe and Central Asia in 2015. Such an index would 
help provide context for the development of future 
digital agriculture strategies for the FAO member 
countries, which starts with sensitizing countries to 
the concept of digital agriculture and the importance 
of digital technologies for the agrifood sector and 
continues with steps towards the digital agriculture 
transformation process.176 REFERENCES
Agfundernews.com. African AgriTech Market Map 
(available at: https://i0.wp.com/agfundernews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/02/African-AgriTech-Market-Map-
FINAL.jpg )
Baumüller, H. 2015. Assessing the role of mobile phones 
in offering price information and market linkages: the 
case of m-farm in Kenya, EJISDC . (68) 6:1-16.
Bhattacharjee, S. & Saravanan, R. 2016. Social Media: 
Shaping the Future of Agricultural Extension and advisory 
Services . GFRAS Interest Group on ICT4RAS discussion 
paper, GFRAS: Lindau, Switzerland.
Coldiretti, 2018. Report for the agri-food forum of Cernobbio 
2018 . Trieste: Instituto Ixe Srl [In Italian].
Disrupt Africa. 2018. African tech startups funding report 
2018 . Disrupt Africa (available at: http://disrupt-africa.
com/funding-report/# )
Downes, L. 2009. The Laws of Disruption: Harnessing the 
New Forces that Govern Life and Business in the Digital Age . 
Basic Books.
European Commission. 2013. Strategic Policy Forum on 
Digital Entrepreneurship. Fuelling Digital Entrepreneurship  
in Europe: background paper . 6pp. (also available at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/5313/
attachments/1/translations )
European Commission. 2019. 2nd Survey of Schools: 
ICT in Education (available at: https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/2nd-survey-schools-ict-
education )
European Parliament, 2015a. Industry 4.0: Digitalisaton for 
productivity and growth . Brussels: European Parliamentary 
Research Service.
European Parliament. 2015b. ICT in the developing world . 
Brussels: European Parliamentary Research Service.
European Parliament, 2019. E-Government Survey 2018 . 
Brussels: European Parliamentary Research Service.Fakhoury, R. 2018. Digital government isn’t working in the 
developing world. Here’s why . The Conversation (available 
at: https://theconversation.com/digital-government-isnt-
working-in-the-developing-world-heres-why-94737 )
FAO, 2018. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in 
the World: Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security . 
Rome: FAO (available at: http://www.fao.org/news/story/
en/item/1152031/icode/)
FAO. 2017b. Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) in Agriculture: A Report to the G20 Agricultural 
Deputies . Rome: FAO.
GSMA. 2018c. Enabling Rural Coverage: Regulatory and 
policy recommendations to foster mobile broadband coverage 
in developing countries . London: GSMA Intelligence.
GSMA. 2019a. The Mobile Economy . London: GSMA 
Intelligence.
GSMA, 2019b. Spectrum: What is spectrum? (available 
at: https://www.gsma.com/spectrum/what-is-spectrum/# )
Hahn, H. P. & Kibora, L. 2008. The domestication of the 
mobile phone: Oral society and new ICT in Burkina Faso. 
The Journal of Modern African Studies . (46)1: 87–109.
ILOSTAT, 2019. Employment database. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization. [Data retrieved May 
2019]
ITU. 2016. Measuring Information Society Report . Geneva: 
ITU.
ITU, 2017. Measuring the Information Society Report: 
Volume 2, ICT country profiles . Geneva: ITU.
ITU. 2018. Measuring the Information Society Report: 
Volume 1 . Geneva: ITU.
Lowder, S.K., Skoet, J. & Raney, T., 2016. The number, 
size and distribution of farms, smallholder farms, and 
family farms worldwide. World Development . (86): 16–29. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AREAS:  BRIEFING PAPER18McKinsey & Co. 2014. Offline and falling behind: Barriers to 
Internet adoption . New York: McKinsey and Company.
OECD. nd. Bridging the Digital Divide  (available at: https://
www.oecd.org/site/schoolingfortomorrowknowledgebase/
themes/ict/bridgingthedigitaldivide.htm )
UN DESA. 2017 World Population Prospects: Key 
findings and advance tables. New York: UN DESA.
UN DESA. 2018a. The 2018 Revision of World Urbanisation 
Prospects . New York: UN DESA.
UN DESA, 2018b. United Nation e-government survey 
2018. New York: UN DESA.
UN DESA, 2019. Population, surface area and density . New 
York: UN DESA.
UNDP. 2015. Work for Human Development: Human 
Development Report 2015 . New York: UNDP.UNESCO. 2017. Reading the past, writing the future Fifty 
years of promoting literacy . Paris: UNESCO. 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2018. Higher education 
attendance  (available at: https://www.education-  
inequalities.org/indicators/higher_1822#?sort=mean&  
dimension=community&group=all&age_group=attend_
higher_1822&countries=all )
USAID, 2018. Digital farmer profile: Reimagining 
Smallholder Agriculture . Washington D.C.: USAID.
World Bank. 2016. World Bank, 2016. World Development 
Report 2016: Digital Dividends . Washington, DC: World 
Bank.
World Bank. 2017. Future of Food: Shaping the Food System 
to Deliver Jobs . Washington, DC: The World Bank.Some rights reserved. This work is available  
under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence
© FAO, 2019 
CA4887EN/1/0 6.19
http://www.fao.org/e-agriculture/
Contact
Information Technology Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
CIO-Director@fao.org  / digital-innovation@fao.org
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00153 Rome, Italy
www.fao.org