 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  2 
OVERVIEW  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  2 
Why are Digital Tools in Agriculture Important?  ................................ ................................ ........................  2 
Opportunity: Mobile C onnectivity in Feed the Future and Affiliate Countries  ................................ ............  3 
PRINCIPLES FOR DIGIT AL DEVELOPMENT  ................................ ................................ ............................  3 
The Principles  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  3 
Market Research  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 5 
Responsible Data Practices  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  7 
Examples of Digital Projects Supported by USAID  ................................ ................................ ...................  8 
DIGITAL TOOLS IN AGR ICULTURE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  10 
Data -Driven Agriculture  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  10 
Precision Agriculture via Geospatial Analysis  ................................ ................................ .........................  11 
ICT-enabled Extension  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  13 
Digital Financial Services  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  16 
PROGRAMMING RESOURCE S ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  18 
Work Planning and Procurement Considerations  ................................ ................................ ...................  18 
Prizes and Challenges  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  19 
APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  21 
Appendix 1: Change in Total Subscribers Since 2010  ................................ ................................ ............  22 
Appendix 2: Change in Mobile Connections Since 2010  ................................ ................................ ........  23 
Appendix 3: Change  in 3G + 4G Market Penetration S ince 2010  ................................ ...........................  24 
Appendix 4: Change in Population S ince 2010  ................................ ................................ .......................  25 
Appendix 5: Agriculture as % of GDP , 2015  ................................ ................................ ...........................  26 Updated: February  2018 
2 Digita l technolog y has en ormou s potential to improve food securit y in Fee d the Future countri es and 
around th e worl d. The purpose o f this toolkit i s to demonstr ate the importance o f digital tools in 
agriculture. It will give a brief overview of the digital tools that are currently being used in the field by  
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) Missions and implementers and resources for
those attempting to implement digital tools in their programs. 
This programming toolkit was created by the Digital Development for Feed the Future (D2FTF) team, 
which is a collaboration between the U.S. Global Development Lab ( the Lab) and the Bureau for Food  
Security (BFS ) at USA ID. Launch ed in Septembe r 2015, D2FT F is a three year partnershi p aim ed at 
integrati ng digit al tools and approache s into the Fe ed the Fut ure portfolio.  
WHY ARE DIGITAL TOO LS IN AGRICULTUR E IMPORTANT? 
Digital tool s can aid in every par t of the agricultura l value chain ; the followi ng are som e of the 
ways that digita l tools can be integrat ed into the agricul tural value chain: 
As a result, using digital tools can reduce crop loss, decrease herd death, increase yields, improve cost -
effectiveness in production, create safety nets, increase storage, prevent spoilage, and increase income. 
Using technology across the value chain tran slates into tangible improvements in food security for 
vulnerable populations.  
OVERVIEW  
 
Updated: February  2018 
3 There is significant evidence (detailed in this spreadshe et and these summary slides ) to support the 
promise of digital tools.  
OPPORTUNITY: MOBILE CONNECTIVITY IN FEED  THE FUTUR E  
AND AFFILIATE COUNTR IES 
The tables in Appendices 1 through 4 show both the absolute change and the percentage change in total 
mobile subscribers ( Appendix 1 ) and total mobile connections (including M2M) ( Appendix 2 ) between 
2010 Q1, when Feed the Future began, and Q2 2017, the most recent data available. The third table 
shows only the absolute change in percentage points of 3G and 4G market penetration ( Appendix 3 ) in 
the same time period. The fourth table shows the increase in population ( Appendix 4 ) during this time. In 
these Feed the Future and affiliate countries, there has been enormous change in each of the mobile 
connectivity categories. Total subscribership increased by 127.82%), mobile connections increased by 
152.10%, and 3G and 4G market penetration increased by an average of 27.96 percentage points in 
Feed the Future and affiliate countries. In comparis on, the population growth in Feed the Future and 
affiliate countries was 18.46%, showing that the growth of these mobile ecosystem indicators clearly 
outpaces population growth. The fifth and final table ( Appendix 5 ) sho ws the value added of agriculture 
in the economy in 2015, which makes up about a quarter of the economy of these countries on average. 
This demonstrates the impact that improvements in the agricultural sector can have on their economy as 
a whole.  
 
 
 
 
Digital technologies are playing an ever more important role in the lives of millions of individuals living in 
Feed the Future supported countries. USAID contributed to and endorses the Principles for Digital 
Development , which are best practices for integrating digital technology into development projects.  
THE PRINCIPLES  
The nine principles are referenced throughout this toolkit and enumerated below:   
1. Design with the Use r: Too often in the field of international development, technology tools are 
created --or tech -enabled projects are designed --without sufficient input from the stakeholders 
whose engagement and ownership are critical to long -term success. Principle #1: Desi gn with the 
User provides recommendations to avoid this common pitfall.  
 
2. Understand the Existing Ecosystem:  To increase the relevance and sustainability of technology -
supported international development, Principle #2: Understand the Ecosystem provides 
recommendations about how to ensure projects and programs are built, managed, and owned 
with consideration given to the local ecosystem.  
 
PRINCIPLES FOR DIGIT AL 
DEVELOPMENT   
Updated: February  2018 
4 Market research about the needs and capabilities of users in the target area, as well as the 
network capacity in the region, should be conducted prior to diving into promoting digital 
technology in agriculture. This is an important step to ensure that digi tal tools are not being 
applied simply for the sake of using digital tools --they should be used only when they are the best 
way to address a defined problem. For more information, see the section on Market Research . 
 
3. Design for Scale : Too often international development projects fail to move beyond the pilot 
stage, or to reach anticipated scale. In some cases, scale is not a necessary criterion for success. 
In others, careful consideration of the necessary inputs can help  projects reach their full potential. 
Principle #3: Design for Scale provides considerations for how to design a project for maximum 
impact.  
 
4. Build for Sustainability : Too often international development projects fail to factor in the physical, 
human, and financial resources that will be necessary for long -term sustainability. Principle #4: 
Build for Sustainability outlines considerations that can support a project’s longevity for the 
intended duration.  
 
5. Be Data Driven : Too often international development p rojects fail to fully leverage data to support 
project planning and decision -making. Principle #5: Be Data Driven provides tips to identify the 
sources of and incorporate data into project design and decision -making.  
 
While data -driven decision -making is i mportant, data practices can have unintended 
consequences for smallholder farmers and other program beneficiaries. Therefore, it is necessary 
to adopt responsible data practices --regarding data collection, stora ge, analysis, and 
dissemination --that address  privacy and security risks, transparency, accountability as well as 
legal and ethical considerations. For more information, see the section on Responsible Data 
Practices . 
  
6. Use Open Data, Open Standards, Open Source, an d Open Innovation : Too often in international 
development, scarce, public resources are spent investing in code, tools, and innovations that are 
either locked away behind p roprietary, fee -based firewalls  or created in a bespoke way for use in 
sector -specif ic silos. Principle #6: Use Open Data, Open Standards, Open Source, and Open 
Innovation provides a framework to consider an “open” approach to technology -enabled 
international development.  
 
7. Reuse and Improve : As the use of information and communications te chnologies in international 
development has matured, so too has a base of methods, standards, software, platforms, and 
other technology tools. Yet , too often we see scarce resources being invested to develop new 
tools when instead existing tools could be a dapted and improved. Principle #7: Reuse and 
Improve highlights ways that adaptation and improvement can lead to higher quality resources 
available to the wider community of international development practitioners.  
  
Updated: February  2018 
5 8. Address Privacy and Security : Informatio n is power, as the old adage goes, and this is certainly 
true in the context of technology -enabled global development interventions. How information is 
collected, stored, analyzed, shared, and used has serious implications for both the populations 
about whom data are being transmitted  and the organizations transmitting the data. Principle #8: 
Address Privacy & Security provides a framework for considering how to protect user privacy and 
the security of data, devices, and tools.  
 
9. Be Collaborative : The prover b “if you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together” 
could easily be a mantra for technology -enabled development projects. Principle #9: Be 
Collaborative suggests strategies for leveraging and contributing to a broader commons of 
resour ce, action, and knowledge to extend the impact of development interventions.  
Resources  
• The Principles for Digital Development : In conjunction with the Principles for Digital 
Development, From Principle to Practice: Implementing the Principles for Digital 
Development  provides practical advice for following through on these principles.  
 
• Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects : Since the mobiles for development space is 
evolving rapidly, the handbook is intended to equip readers with  a set of questions to ask when 
using or considering mobiles, rather than providing a prescription for how to use mobiles in a 
given country or sector. It is split into five sections: understanding mobiles for development, 
understanding the mobile ecosyste m, project design, procurement, and monitoring 
implementation and program evaluation . 
 
• USAID Learning Lab : USAID’s Learning Lab is an interactive community where members can 
access and contribute to a growin g repository of tools and resources on integrating collaborating, 
learning, and adapting (CLA) throughout the USAID Program Cycle.  
 
• Digital Services Playbook : The U.S. Government’s Chief Information Officer crea ted a 
playbook of 13 key “plays” drawn from successful practices from the private sector and 
government that, if followed together, will help government build effective digital services. 
Though aimed primarily at domestic users/services, many of the princi ples are useful for 
international digital development as well.  
MARKET RESEARCH  
Digital tools should only be used where the ability and potential for impact are clear. Market research 
about the needs and capabilit ies of users in the target area  as well as t he network capacity in the region, 
should be conducted prior to diving into promoting digital technology in agriculture. This is an important 
step to ensure that digital tools are not being applied simply for the sake of using digital tools --they should 
be used only when they are the best way to address a defined problem. Research should also take note 
of existing infrastructure and consider scalability of all digital interventions. It is impossible to design an  
Updated: February  2018 
6 effective approach without a thorough underst anding of the ecosystem and possible changes in the 
environment.  
Resources  
• Understand the Existing Ecosystem Guides : Guides by organizations involved with developing 
the Principles for Digital Development or recommended by members of the working group.  
 
• Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects : Since the mobiles for  development space is 
evolving rapidly, the handbook is intended to equip readers with a set of questions to ask when 
using or considering mobiles, rather than providing a prescription for how to use mobiles in a 
given country or sector. It is split into f ive sections: understanding mobiles for development, 
understanding the mobile ecosystem, project design, procurement, and monitoring 
implementation and program evaluation.  
 
• Tools for Innovation Programming Step 1: Identify & Define the Problem : This document will 
explain and offer guidance on the following activities: Assembling the Team, Identifying the 
Problem, Drafting the Concept Note, Conducting the Barrier Analysis, Finalizing the Challenge 
Statement. Though this guide is directed specifically towards prizes/grand challenges, much of 
the advice is useful for ident ifying development problems to focus on more generally.  
 
• Digital Services Playbook, Play 1: Understand What People Need : This provides some useful 
questions to ask and a suggested checklist to ensure that the user is at the center of a digital 
intervention.  
   
Updated: February  2018 
7 RESPONSIBLE DATA PRA CTICES  
Data -driven decision -making is important, but the way that data is collected, stored, analyzed, shared, 
released and ultimately communicated can have unintended consequences for smallholder farmers and 
other program beneficiaries. Digital technologies incr easingly used in development accelerate the speed 
and volume of data collection and sharing, amplifying both potential benefits and harms to individuals and 
communities. USAID and other development actors have identified privacy protection as one of the 
Principles for Digital Development  that is perhaps most challenging  to put into practice. Good 
pract ices must balance needs for mitigating privacy and security risks with the need for data use and data 
sharing, while promoting transparency, accountability and public  good by making data open, and taking  
legal and ethical considerations.  
Resources  
• Responsible Data in Agriculture : This publication from the Global Open Data for Agriculture 
and Nutrition network provides a broad overview of some of the responsible data challenges 
facing actors in the agricultural sector, with a focus on the power imbalance between actors, and 
looks into how that inequality affects behavior  when it comes to the agricultural data ecosystem. 
This publication gives an overview of different type s of agri cultural data, identifies challenges and 
tensions around agricultural data, and lays out best practices for managing data responsibly at a 
high level.  
 
• World F ood Program Guide to Data Protection and Privacy : These guidelines lay out 
principles for protection of personal data for beneficiaries and prospective beneficiaries within the 
context of WFP programs and are intended for WFP staff primarily. The guideline s also provide 
model templates for informed consent, self assessment compliance checklists and resources on 
conducting a privacy impact assessment.  
 
• Address Privacy and Se curity Guides : A list of guides from various sources - Amnesty 
International, OECD, UN, etc. - that address privacy and security.  
 
• The Need for Resp onsible Data Practices within Agriculture : (audio) Ana Maria Cuenca, 
Deputy Director in FHI 360's Social and Economic Development Department – who presented at 
the ICTforAg 2017 Conference with independent technology consultant, Linda Raftree – talks 
about  risks that are present throughout the data collection cycle and what’s needed to establish 
clear guidance on good data practices.  
 
• Digital Services Playbook, Play 11: Manage security and privacy thr ough reusable 
processes : This provides some useful questions to ask and a suggested checklist to ensure that 
a proper security and privacy process is adopted.  
 
• Data Starter Kit Cash Learning Program : The Electronic Cash Transfer Learning and Action 
Network (ELAN) Data Starter Kit is designed  to help humanitarians plan and improve data 
management practices. Building upon the CaLP’s Protecting Beneficiary Privacy, the Starter Kit Updated: February  2018 
8 comprises  of tip sheets and a glossary that align with the project and data management 
lifecycles, and provide concr ete tips to help humanitarians assess data risks, minimize data 
collected, and protect and securely share data. While the ELAN developed this Starter Kit for field 
staff implementing e -transfer programs, many of the concepts are not cash or e -transfer spec ific 
and may be useful to other types of programs.  
Examples  
•Musoni Case Study : Musoni became the first completely cashless microfinance institution in the
world, by enabling customers to receive and repay their loans via Safaricom’s M -PESA system,
rather than in cash. As of July 2017, Musoni had disbursed 207,823 loans to 91,454 clients.
EXAMPLES OF DIGITAL PROJECTS SUPPORTED B Y USAID  
The Agency recognizes th e promise of Digital Development in Agriculture and is addressing it in a 
number of innovative ways:  
•The U.S. Global Development Lab (the Lab) and the Bureau for Food Security (BFS) are 
collaborating  in an effort called “Digital Development for Feed the Future” (D2FTF) to demonstrate 
how the results and cost effectiveness of the U.S. Government’s Feed the Future initiative can be 
increased when a Feed the Future country team leverages digital approaches  holistically and 
according to best practices. The three-ye ar collaboration, set to end in September  2018, is focused 
on integrating a suite of coordinated digital tools and technologies into Feed the Future activities, 
demonstrating how doing so can accelerate progress towards Feed the Future high-level  indicators 
of increasing agricultural income and improving nutrition in 12 target countries and beyond.
D2FTF has three primary components -- technical assistance to Feed the Future programs,  
capacity building for USAID staff in Washington and the field working on Feed the Future 
programs, and strengthening the knowledge base on best practices in digital agriculture. D2FTF 
addresses best practices in digital agriculture through four key areas: (1) precision agriculture,  both 
on- and off-farm; (2) more effective data collection, analysis and dissemination; (3) information 
delivery through mobile-enabled extension services, and (4) financial inclusion  through  digital 
financial services.
•In 2012, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Vodafone, and TechnoServe  
launched a new partnership to increase the productivity, incomes and resilience of smallholder  
farmers in Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania.  The Connected Farmer Alliance leveraged  
mobile phone- enabled solutions to improve supply chain efficiency and increase farmers’ ability to 
access secure, timely payments and other financial services. The partnership connects hundreds  
of thousands of smallholder farmers by expanding the use of mobile financial services pioneered  
by Vodafone’s existing mobile money platform, M-Pesa—a highly successful SMS-based money  
transfer service already at scale in Kenya, where 15 million people exchange $850 million via the 
system every month. Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania are home to Vodafone affiliate 
companies. Vodafone and TechnoServe will work with farming communities and supply chains in  
Updated: February  2018 
9 these countries to develop and scale mobile applications that enable rural households to t ransfer 
and receive payments securely, access other financial services, and facilitate linkages to local 
and multinational agribusinesses, especially those looking to serve smallholder farmers working 
in Feed th e Future priority value chains.  
 
• Feed the Future Malawi Mobile Money  is a four -year long project that seeks to increase mobile 
money adoption in Malawi and enhance product development through collaborative, targe ted 
interventions that demonstrate the advantages of mobile money. The program supports and 
advances the growth of mobile money in Malawi through a series of coordinated interventions 
that include strategic pilots as well as targeted technical assistance t o key public and private 
sector stakeholders.  
   
Updated: February  2018 
10  
There are four broad categories of digital tools used in agriculture programs: (1) Data -Driven 
Agriculture , (2) Precision Agriculture , (3) ICT-Enabled Extension , and (4) Digital Financial Services . 
 
 
Different categories of digital tools should not be taken alone, but rather as aspects  that reinforce the 
others’ effectiveness. Better and higher quality data enables precision agriculture and extension services, 
allowing for digital financial services. These tools work in concert to promote better development 
outcomes.  
DATA -DRIVEN AGRICUL TURE  
Access to metrics like soil moisture and weather data can help farmers make decisions about when to 
irrigate crops, and satellite imagery can be combined with existing data to make soil quality predictions. 
Effective data usage has the potential to ha ve a significant impact on smallholder farmers, as discussed 
in this blog post . Digital technology can make a difference in data collection , as described in the table 
below:  
 
FUNCTION   HOW TECHNOLOGY CAN M AKE A DIFFERENCE  
Data collection  Many digital tools can aid in the data collection process. One of the most promising forms 
of data collection is the “Internet  of Things,”  (IoT)  or sensors that can be used to provide 
real-time data on things like temperature, soil moisture, and weather conditions. Other 
tools include geographic position systems (GPS) or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to 
collect spatial data. Fo r example, remote sensing (through tools such as satellite imagery 
and UAVs) can be used to predict yields in a given season, helping governments to 
immediately know and take action if there is a food shortage. Mobile data collection is 
another way that te chnology can help: transferring data to a computer from a phone or 
tablet makes data transfer faster and more accurate.  
See:  Low-Cost Sensors for Agriculture  
DIGITAL TOOLS IN 
AGRICULTURE  
 
Updated: February  2018 
11 A vital step in using data for agriculture is communicating results to farmers. Some digital tools, such as 
low-cost sensors, send measurements directly to mobile phones or can be checked manually by farmers. 
The type of complex analysis performed by outsi de groups, such as aWhere , can be delivered to local 
farmers electronically. LandPKS  delivers its  information via a mobile app.  
Resources  
• Innovation for Data -Driven Agriculture : This document discusses 1) the opportunities and 
challenges surrounding data collection, analysis, open sharing and appropriate distribution, 2) the 
need to better understand and incorporate smallholder farmer concerns throughout the design 
and implementation of programs and ventures and 3) defining and engaging an “innovation 
ecosystem” of cross -sector actors addressing smallholder needs with data -driven approaches to 
agricultural development.  
Examples  
• A Philippine Climate Change Adaptation Strategy : The USAID -funded Bicol Agri -Water 
Project (BAWP) aims to improve the management of irrigation water through extensive data 
analysis.  
 
• Big Data for Climate -Smart Agriculture : Researchers have applied Big Data analytics to 
agricultural and weather records in  Colombia, revealing how climate variation impacts rice yields. 
These analyses identify the most productive rice varieties and planting times for specific sites and 
seasonal forecasts. The recommendations could potentially boost yields by 1 to 3 tons per 
hectare. The tools work wherever data is available and are now being scaled out through 
Colombia, Argentina, Nicaragua, Peru, and Uruguay.  
 
• A Mobile -based Survey in Mozambique : With support from USAID/Mozambique and DFID, 
mSTAR recently completed the large -scale Mobile Access and Use Study (MAUS), employing a 
mobile -based survey component. The study examined the availability and accessibility of mobile 
technologies an d the dynamic ways they are being used in the daily lives of Mozambicans.  
PRECISION AGRICULTURE  VIA GEOSPATIAL ANAL YSIS  
Geospatial analysis is the gathering, display, and manipulation of imagery, GPS, satellite photography 
and historical data, described ex plicitly in terms of geographic coordinates or implicitly, in terms of a street 
address, postal code, or other identifier as they are applied to geographic models. Geographic data 
analysis and visualization allows us to investigate geographic patterns and relationships over space and 
across time. T his helps us  answer geographic questions that lead to place -based understanding and 
action.  
 
This type of analysis is often performed with Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software. Using GIS 
technology and geographic data is increasingly important in development donors’  efforts to geographically 
target investments and effectively monitor and report on their scope and impact.  
  
Updated: February  2018 
12 The type and quality of geospatial analysis that can be conducted depends on the available data. The 
more precise/specific the level of data, the more options that are available to analyze it. Geospatial data 
can be gath ered in different ways, such as remote sensing tec hnologies, interviews, and  crowd -sourced 
information.  
Uses of geospatial  analysis in agriculture include:  
• Identification of a zone(s) of intervention during program/project design. e.g. A Maize Value Chain  
project will want to invest in areas where the soil is suitable for the growth of maize, most farmers 
are growing maize as the main crop, roads are practicable to inputs and maize distribution, 
demand for maize is high and profitable, etc.  
 
• Monitoring and  Evaluation. e.g. Has the use of improved seeds, pesticides, herbicides and 
improved management led to an improved yield? Is the yield gap the same across the zone of 
intervention? What were the drivers?  
 
• Using data (such as distance to market, population  density, and arable land) to determine target 
geographies. e.g. maize target zones  
 
• Targeted variety selection and distribution across the zone of intervention. e.g. Inventory of input 
dealers and their distribution points, identification of farmers clust ers and roads network 
classification will help improve inputs distribution flows.  
 
• Identification of crops and estimation of yield and growing seasons. e.g. The use of unmanned 
aerial vehicles (UAV) and satellite imagery could help remote monitoring of pro jects and cut costs 
of lengthy and expensive surveys.  
 
• Landscape and watershed analysis. e.g. This could help improve water (NRM) resources 
management for a fair and efficient community -based irrigation system, water rights, water 
savings, etc.  
Resources:  
• GeoCenter Remote Sensing Program : This program, sponsored by the GeoCenter, provides 
USAID Implementing Partners with access to high resolution satellite imagery.  
 
• Youth Mappers Program : This USAID program connects a network of over 4000 student 
mappers from around the world to project areas in need of improved spatial data. The student 
mappers create new open geospatial data in the OpenStreetMap platfor m to support responders 
and aid organizations.  
 
• OpenStreetMap : OpenStreetMap is built by a community of mappers that contribute and 
maintain data about roads, trails, cafés, railway stations, and much more, all o ver the world.  
  
Updated: February  2018 
13 • AidData : Search, query and download geocoded dataset of development programs. Datasets are 
available at different sub -national levels  
 
• Geospatial Toolkit : map -based software applications for 23 countries that integrate resource 
data and other geographic information systems (GIS) data for resource assessment.  
Examp les: 
• Bangladesh Livelihood Map: Household Nutrition : A visualization of food consumption data in 
Bangladesh.  
 
• PREMPT : Pest Risk Mapping and Establishment Tool. It helps users visualize the current global 
presence of any invasive pest, and compare future risks across various what -if scenarios. 
PREMPT integrates diverse data -sets and leve rages state -of-the-art methods from computer 
science, ecology, economics, epidemiology and transportation. We believe that when fully 
developed, it will help policy makers manage and respond to pest outbreaks. The current 
prototype focuses on Tuta absoluta , a devastating tomato pest. Native to South America, in the 
last 10 years, it has spread throughout parts of Europe, Africa and Asia. Here is an 
accompanying video  and paper . 
 
• Fararano : Funded by USAID’s Development Food Assistance Program , the Fararano project in 
Madagascar uses geospatial data to optimize the cost of its food inputs. Read more about the 
project here .  
ICT-ENABLED  EXTENSION  
ICT-enabled Extension is information delivery via digital channels (including SMS, Interactive Voice 
Response (IVR), interactive radio, low cost video) allows extension workers (or other information delivery 
providers) to reach more far mers and provide more timely reminders and alerts, helping to prompt 
behavior change and enhanced ways of learning for farmers and value chain actors.  
 
ICT-enabled Extension uses  digital tools to enable farmers to increase their productivity. Farmers do no t 
always have the information they need to adapt to droughts, storms, and changing weather and soil 
conditions, or may not know about new technology or practices to increase yields. This type of service 
has traditionally been provided person -to-person by a gronomists, but technology can achieve the same 
effect more efficiently.  
 
While there are a number of ways to reach farmers in order to help them improve their productivity, i n 
most cases, extension enables  the following:  
1. Raise Awareness : make farmers awar e of the tools/methods that are available to them  
2. Convince : persuade farmers that it is worth trying these tools/methods.  
3. Educate : show farmers how to use the tools/methods they have been convinced to try  
4. Remind : follow up with farmers as appropriate to en sure they are using this knowledge   
Updated: February  2018 
14 Types of ICT-enabled Agricultural Extension:  
• Low-Cost Video : this is a way to convey the experience of local farmers and ag ronomists to a 
broader audience  in a compelling multi -media form. Digital Green  is one of the organizations 
using this type of agricultural extension.  
 
• Mobile : mobile applications can be split into the categories “push” and “pull.” Push applications 
focus on sending information at the right time, generally based on detailed farmer profiles, which 
ideally have information about the farmer’s location and crops/crop cycles. Pull applications allow 
farmers to seek out information about agricultural topics, for example, a specific crop.  
 
• Radio : informat ion about best agricultural practices can be disseminated to wide audiences on 
the radio. Groups such as Farm Radio International are combining mobile and radio technology to 
create an interactive experience where farmers can react to the radio content usi ng SMS 
messaging.  
Principles for Extension:  
• Adapted to the local context  
For example, in areas with low bandwidth, it is difficult to disseminate videos; and where literacy 
rates are low, voice messages will be more effective than text messages.  
 
• Demand -driven and farmer -led 
See: Demand Driven Agricultural Advisory Services from the Neuchâtel Group  
 
• Mark et-oriented  
See: Common Framework on Market -Oriented Agricultural Advisory Services from the 
Neuchâtel Group  
 
• Pluralistic  
The public, private, and civil society sectors and stakeholders should all play a role and be 
integrated.  
 
• Accountable  
Common metrics for measuring cost effectiveness and impact that ensure accountability across 
all actors and dimensions involved with extension and advisory se rvices  
 
• Sustainable  
 
• Scalable  
Resources:  
• Organizational Guide to ICT4D : This guide gives practical guidance to building organizational 
capacity in Inform ation and Communications Technologies for Development (ICT4D). Drawing  
Updated: February  2018 
15 from the experience of the international development community, the guide connects established 
principles with processes for implementing new technology.  
 
• Integrating Low -Cost Video into Agricultural Development Projects : This toolkit is designed 
to help projects and organizations use low -cost video to augment the traditional agricultural 
developme nt activities and extension services they are providing.  
 
• How To Use Mobile Data Solutions for Better Development Outcomes Course : This 
interactive self -paced online course  (approximately 2 hours, free) helps global development 
organizations explore opportunities to use mobile technologies to improve the efficiency and 
quality of the data they collect, manage, analyze, and share and offers a comprehensive 
introduction to key  terms, concepts, technologies, and strategies.  
Examples:  
• Partnering with Indonesia on Mobile Extension Services for Imp roved Regional Fish 
Farming : An example of “pull” type mobile extension service, where farmers can access 
information through AquaFIS, a service that provides real -time data and extension services 
through SMS, mobile applications, and online forums.  
 
• Akorion Services : Akorion delivers its innovative services to smallholder farmers through its 
value chain digitization platform, EzyAgric.  
 
• Harnessing ICT to Increase Agricultural Production: Evidence from Kenya : Sending SMS 
messages with agricultural advice to smallholder farmers increased yields by 11.5% relative to a 
control group with no messages. These effects are concentrat ed among farmers who had no 
agronomy training and had little interaction with sugar cane company staff at baseline. Enabling 
farmers to report input provision delays to the company reduces the proportion of delays in 
fertilizer delivery by 21.6%. There is evidence that reporting a complaint has positive geographic 
spillovers, since it induces the company to deliver inputs to several neighboring plots.  
 
• Teleconferences and Telecenters for Training in Peru : In order to facilitate the transition from 
illegal coca farming to the formal economy, “telecenters” were built to support online connectivity 
and offer trainings on digital and financial litera cy. 
 
• Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency Creates a Hotline to Help Smallholder 
Farmers Nationwide : The Interactive Voice Response (IVR)/Short Message Service (SMS) 
system currently provides smallholder farmers free access to information on cereal, horticulture, 
and pulse/oil seed crops, as well as a wide range of agriculture -related activities. A push -based 
voice and SMS alert system also notifies extension workers and smallholder farmers of any 
pertinent agriculture issues.   
Updated: February  2018 
16 DIGITAL FINANCIAL SE RVICES  
Digital finance services (DFS) are inclusive electronic payments, such as mobile money, that reduce 
costs  and increase transparency, helping to combat poverty and improve public financial management. 
Increased use of the existing systems and technical assistance to strengthen the supply, demand, and 
regulatory and policy frameworks contributes to the developm ent of robust digital finance ecosystems in 
targeted developing countries.  
 
Digital financial services can help to address specific chronic challenges across the agricultural value 
chain —especially where the traditional finance sector is not fully addressi ng the demands in rural 
markets. This sector often faces high infrastructure costs and a lack of incentives to adapt products to the 
unique needs of farmers. Digital finance expands access to the formal financial system through both 
basic transaction accou nts and branchless banking. Basic transaction accounts are supervised by 
banking regulators, taking advantage of the rapid growth of digital and mobile telephone infrastructure; 
branchless banking offers the ability to transact outside of a traditional ban k branch. These factors have a 
direct link to increasing farmer income and decreasing malnutrition.  
 
Using DFS to address specific challenges in agriculture has significant spillover effects. Integrating DFS 
helps to engage the private sector in the rural economy due to the rapid growth of digital finance 
providers in Feed the Future priority markets, spurring lasting market growth (the goal of Feed the 
Future’s market systems approach).  
Uses of DFS in agriculture include:  
• Savings/Credit Products : credit (in the form of loans, notes, bills of exchange, banker’s 
acceptances, etc.) and savings can be used to finance agricultural transactions, such as , 
improved seeds or agricultural tools. These mechanisms can be adapted to farmers’ specific 
needs, based on p lanting, harvesting, and marketing cycles.  
 
• Digitally -Enabled Index Insurance : insurance that is tied to wea ther events can help farmers’ 
mitigate  risks and increase profits with digital purchase, claims filing, resolution, and payout.  
 
• E-vouchers : governm ents can subsidize the purchase of improved agricultural inputs through a 
digital platform  
 
• Basic Transaction Account : a mobile wallet allowing for funds storage and for farmers to easily 
receive payments in times of need increases farmers’ ability to with stand shocks (related to 
climate or other threats to household resiliency)  
Resources  
• Guide to the Use of Digital Financial Services in Agriculture : The goal of this Guide is to 
identify specific challenges in value chains that can be addressed by improved payments or 
financial services, and then to identify corresponding DFS solutions to these specific challenges,  
Updated: February  2018 
17 with the aim of improvin g the ability of value chains to increase farmer incomes. It is split into five 
sections: introduction, analytical framework, intervention types, case studies, and procurement.  
 
• Making the Journey from Cash to Electronic Payments: A Toolkit for USAID Implementing 
Partners and Development Organizations : The Toolkit is intended to be a practical “how -to” 
guide divided into step -by-step modules explaining how to use electronic payments for 
development. It is split into three sections: introduction, analysis, and implementation.  
 
• Procurement Executive’s Bulletin on Guidance for Electronic Payments under USAID 
awards : The purpose of this Bulletin is to provide guidance to the Acquisition Workforce on 
promoting electronic payments under contracts, grants and cooperative ag reements.  
 
• Mission Critical: Enabling Digital Environments for Development : This USAID Opportunity 
Brief is a guide to help USAID and other governme nt employees engage with policy makers and 
regulators in emerging markets to advance enabling environments for digital financial services" or 
"enabling environments for digital payments. By highlighting stories and lessons from around the 
world, this brief  aims to inspire ideas and action to propel digital payments forward in countries 
where USAID operates.  
Examples:  
• ADVANCE Case Study : As the main value chain project of USAID/Ghana’s Feed the Future 
efforts , the Agricultural Development and Value Chain Enhancement II (ADVANCE II) project 
aims to improve the livelihoods of 113,000 smallholder farmer beneficiaries by boosting the 
productivity of rice, maize, and soy value chains. ADVANCE II has integrated a fu ll suite of digital 
tools into its programming. In doing so, the project aims to increase the earnings and security of 
the smallholder farmers it supports throughout Ghana.  
 
• Musoni Case Study : Musoni became the first completely cashless microfinance institution in the 
world, by enabling customers to receive and repay their loans via Safaricom’s M -PESA system, 
rather than in cash. As of July 2017, Musoni had di sbursed 207,823 loans to 91,454 clients.  
 
• Serving Smallholder Farmers in Nigeria: Recent Developments in  Digital Finance : 
Introduces some recent developments in DFS for smallholder farmers in Nigeria. The featured 
case studies (i) identify traditional pain points in serving smallholder farmers (such as the cost 
and risk of making payments to farmers and deli vering subsidized credit), (ii) discuss how DFS 
are being used to overcome these pain points, and (iii) highlight some initial obstacles and 
successes.  
 
• Mobile Mone y, Smallholder Farmers, and Household Welfare in Kenya : Analyzes impacts of 
mobile money technology on the welfare of smallholder farm households in Kenya. Using panel 
survey data and regression models, we show that mobile money use has a positive impact o n 
household income. Mobile money users apply more purchased farm inputs, market a larger  
Updated: February  2018 
18 proportion of their output, and have higher profits than non -users of this technology. These results 
suggest that mobile money can help to overcome important smallhold er market access 
constraints that obstruct rural development and poverty reduction.  
 
WORK PLANNING AND PR OCUREMENT CONSIDERAT IONS  
Guidelines for Procurement:  
• In general, “Digital” in its many forms is a tool, not a goal, and should  be used where it enables 
the achievement of development objectives, reduces the cost of delivery, or both. Unless 
expanding access to digital tools (such as investing in mobile or internet connectivity, supporting 
related government policy, or partnering with technology firms or network operators) is part of the 
stated objective of an activity or program their use should not be mandated within a procurement 
without evidence that a mandated tool or approach is demonstrably better than other methods. 
(The ex ception is in monitoring and evaluation where digital tools should be the default unless 
there is strong justification for manual collection and reporting.)  
 
• While “digital” should not generally be mandated, implementing partners should be encouraged to 
explore digital tools.  
 
• Implementing partners should also be encouraged to consider non -traditional partnerships to 
engage the technology community, innovators, and incubators as a way to spur investment in 
digital approaches.  
 
• Digital language does not g o in just one place in the procurement document: it should be in 
several places (e.g., the program description/SOW/SOO, the evaluation criteria), both because 
some of it may be cut out during the editing process and because it should be considered 
together  with the task at hand, not as a separate requirement.  
 
• Ask that implementing partners mention, emphasize, and adhere to the Principles for Digital 
Development  and describe how any technology solution will b e consistent with the Principles.  
 
• Promote open -source, or at least open platform, solutions. Discourage proprietary or closed 
technology solutions that cannot be owned or afforded by local actors  
 
• Consider “total cost of ownership” in evaluating technolog y solutions.  
 
• Technology can be transformative, opening up new possibilities beyond incrementally improving 
existing methods.  
PROGRAMMING RESOURCE S  
Updated: February  2018 
19 Resources  
• Procurement Executive’s Bullet in on Guidance for Electronic Payments under USAID 
awards : The purpose of this bulletin is to provide guidance to the Acquisition Workforce on 
promoting electronic payments under contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements.  It 
encourages staff to ensure  that the default payment mechanism that implementing partners rely 
on is electronic where feasible.  USAID staff have the discretion to waive the expectation for 
electronic payments if the implementing partner demonstrates that doing so is not feasible in  the 
context in question.  
 
• ADS 579: USAID Development Data : Data, and the information derived from data, are assets 
for USAID, its partners, the academic and scientific com munities, and the public at large. The 
value of data used in strategic planning, design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of 
USAID’s programs is enhanced when those data are made available throughout the Agency and 
to all other interested stakeho lders, in accordance with proper protection and redaction allowable 
by law.  
 
• ADS 201: Program Cycle Operational Policy : The Program Cycle is USAID’s operational 
model for p lanning, delivering, assessing, and adapting development programming in a given 
region or country to advance U.S. foreign policy. It encompasses guidance and procedures for: 
(1) Making strategic decisions at the regional or country level about programmatic  areas of focus 
and associated resources; (2) Designing projects and supportive activities to implement strategic 
plans; and (3) Learning from performance monitoring, evaluations, and other relevant sources of 
information to make course corrections as need ed and inform future programming. Program 
Cycle implementation also facilitates USAID’s compliance with many requirements of the 
Government Performance and Results Modernization Act (GPRAMA).  
PRIZES AND  CHALLENGES  
Prizes and Challenges are a way to crowdso urce innovative solutions to well -defined development 
problems, and often cut across all of the categories of technology and more.  
 
Prizes are designed to award the achievement of a specific outcome, while challenges are designed to 
conduct a search for multiple broad solutions, make awards, and support their development. Common 
features of both include: a well -defined problem, a call to action, an active outreach campaign to attract a 
wide range of qualified competitors, an application cycle or investmen t window, an evaluation criteria and 
judging, and an incentive.  
Examples:  
• Data -Driven Farming Prize : D2FTF launched the Data -Driven Farming Prize in collaboration 
with the Global Development Lab’s  iDesign team. The prize was designed to bridge new sources 
of agricultural data, and insights from it , to smallholder far mers in Nepal. This prize was 
managed from Washington, D.C. with strategy, design, communications, and prize administration 
(cash transfer) help from an implementer.  Updated: February  2018 
20 •Tech4Farmers Challenge : The Tech 4Farmers Asia Challenge aims to identify and support
innovative solutions from South or Southeast Asia which address critical constraints faced by
farmers in the region. Our focus is on improving the productivity, sustainability and profitability of
smallh olders involved in vegetable and aquaculture production.
Resources:  
•Innovation Programming, and Design Toolkit : This Toolkit , and its  10 individual resources was
designed to help you think through how to design a challenge or a prize from beginning to end,
including elements like communications and evaluation. It also helps you think about what comes
after the award and how to help ensu re the innovations you support have the best possible
chance to have lasting impact. This was written by teams of experts and program managers who
have designed and executed numerous prizes, grand challenges, and ventures.
Get in touch with the U.S. Global Development Lab:  
twitter.com/globaldevlab   •  facebook.com/globaldevlab   
www.usaid.gov/d igitalag   •  agriculture.digitaldevelopment.org  Updated: February  2018 
21 Appendix 1.  Change in Total Subscribers Since 2010  
Appendix 2 . Change in Mobile Connections Since 2010  
Appendix 3.  Change  in 3G + 4G Market Penetration S ince 2010  
Appendix 4.  Change in Population S ince 2010  
Appendix 5.  Agriculture as % of GDP , 2015  
APPENDICES  Updated: February  2018 
22 APPENDIX 1: CHANGE IN TOTAL SUBSCRIBERS SINCE 2010 
The table below shows the change in total subscribers between Q1 2010 and Q2 2017 in Feed the Future 
and affiliate countries. Total change ranges from 844,213 in Liberia to 49,553,632 i n Bangladesh; percent 
change ranges from 20.25% in Honduras to 554.85% i n Ethiopi a. In total , total subscribers in these 
countries hav e increased by 127.82%, or 239,713,576. 
TOTAL SUBSCRIBERS  
COUNTRY  ABSOLUTE CHANGE IN 
TOTAL SUBSCRIBERS  PERCENT CHANGE IN 
TOTAL SUBSCRIBERS  
Bangladesh  49,553,632  123.28  
Cambodia  7,469,983  144.29  
Ethiopia  30,697,049  554.85  
Ghana  10,286,432  115.80  
Guatemala  2,423,346  38.14  
Haiti 1,847,803  63.99  
Honduras  943,218  20.25  
Kenya  15,988,624  121.93  
Liberia  844,213  92.99  
Malawi  2,740,613  128.51  
Mali 8,501,827  245.56  
Mozambique  9,793,886  206.48  
Nepal  13,764,215  260.32  
Niger  3,539,130  160.41  
Nigeria  41,162,246  84.88  
Rwanda  4,511,252  214.23  
Senegal  3,918,478  90.43  
Tajikistan  2,979,231  91.76  
Tanzania  13,229,428  112.81  
Uganda  9,393,025  108.81  
Zambia  6,125,945  176.93  
TOTAL  239,713,576  127.82  
Source: GSMA Intelligence  Updated: February  2018 
23 APPENDIX 2: CHANGE IN MOBILE CONNECTIONS SINCE 2010 
The table below shows the change in mobile connections between Q1 2010 and Q2 2017 in Feed the 
Future and affiliate countries. Total change ranges from 1,057,209 in Honduras to 79,610,916 in 
Bangladesh; percent change ranges from 14.36% in Honduras to 382.31 % in Nepal. In total, total 
subscribers in these countries have increased by 152.10%, or 421,950,952. 
MOBILE CONNECTIONS  
COUNTRY  ABSOLUTE CHANGE IN M OBILE 
CONNECTIONS  PERCENT CHANGE IN MO BILE 
CONNECTIONS  
Bangladesh  79,610,916  145.66  
Cambodia  19,745,886  227.08  
Ethiopia  45,154,056  749.60  
Ghana  23,104,140  144.99  
Guatemala  7,225,861  62.54  
Haiti 2,892,956  82.86  
Honduras  1,057,209  14.36  
Kenya  18,393,354  92.44  
Liberia  2,139,794  167.52  
Malawi  4,765,313  173.09  
Mali 15,131,694  328.95  
Mozambique  12,786,314  205.52  
Nepal  26,878,153  382.31  
Niger  5,926,500  214.97  
Nigeria  88,128,344  115.26  
Rwanda  7,660,375  287.23  
Senegal  7,608,443  105.15  
Tajikistan  5,080,498  115.77  
Tanzania  22,604,268  128.47  
Uganda  17,100,728  139.38  
Zambia  8,956,150  197.16  
TOTAL  421,950,952  152.10  
Source: GSMA Intelligence  Updated: February  2018 
24 APPENDIX 3: CHANGE IN 3G + 4G MARKET PENETRATION SINCE 2010 
The table below shows the change in 3G + 4G mark et penetration between Q1 2010 and Q2 2017 in 
Feed the Future and affiliate countries. Total chang e ranges from 1.49 percentage points in Niger to 
79.51 percentage points in Cambodi a. On averag e, 3G + 4G mark et penetration increased by 27.96 
percentage points in thes e countries. 
3G + 4G MARKET PENET RATION 
COUNTRY  ABSOLUTE CHANGE IN M ARKET PENETRATION  
(PERCENTAGE POINTS)  
Bangladesh  20.54  
Cambodia  79.51  
Ethiopia  34.64  
Ghana  62.08  
Guatemala  39.91  
Haiti 15.76  
Honduras  43.4 
Kenya  17.39  
Liberia  9.8 
Malawi  10.99  
Mali 18.7 
Mozambique  28.63  
Nepal  28.98  
Niger  1.49 
Nigeria  27.7 
Rwanda  34.68  
Senegal  22.12  
Tajikistan  25.41  
Tanzania  27.87  
Uganda  18 
Zambia  19.49  
AVERAGE  27.96  
Source: GSMA Intelligence  Updated: February  2018 
25 APPENDIX 4: CHANGE IN POPULATION SINCE 2010 
The table below shows the change in population between Q1 2010 and Q2 2017 in Feed the Future and 
affiliate countries. In total, the population increased 18.46 %, or 134,821,323 , in these countries. This is 
significantly less than the increases seen in total subscribers (239,713,57 6, or 127.82%) or mobile 
connections (421,950,952 , or 152.10%).  
POPULATION  
COUNTRY  ABSOLUTE CHANGE 
IN POPULATION  PERCENT CHANGE 
IN POPULATION  
Bangladesh  13,638,676  9.02 
Cambodia  1,767,596  12.35  
Ethiopia  17,348,016  19.94  
Ghana  4,490,131  18.58  
Guatemala  2,351,793  16.05  
Haiti 1,020,323  10.24  
Honduras  830,996  11.12  
Kenya  8,403,196  20.97  
Liberia  806,570  20.56  
Malawi  3,639,047  24.82  
Mali 3,640,860  24.19  
Mozambique  5,384,867  22.29  
Nepal  2,381,938  8.89 
Niger  5,426,566  33.63  
Nigeria  33,465,593  21.13  
Rwanda  1,933,186  18.90  
Senegal  3,191,276  24.81  
Tajikistan  1,318,103  17.48  
Tanzania  11,585,607  25.58  
Uganda  8,774,094  26.69  
Zambia  3,422,889  24.78  
TOTAL  134,821,323  18.46  
Source: GSMA Intelligence  Updated: February  2018 
26 APPENDIX 5:  AGRICULTURE AS % OF GDP, 2015 
The table below shows the value added of the agricultural sector in Feed the Future and affiliate 
countries’ GDPs, which averaged 25.30%. The lowes t percen t value added was 5.25% in Zambi a, and 
the highes t was 40.9 7% in Mali. 
AGRICULTURE IN THE ECONOMY  
COUNTRY  AGRICULTURE, VALUE A DDED 
(% OF GDP)  
Bangladesh  15.51  
Cambodia  28.63  
Ethiopia  39.23  
Ghana  20.99  
Guatemala  10.76  
Haiti No Data  
Honduras  13.59  
Kenya  33.30  
Liberia  34.37  
Malawi  29.71  
Mali 40.97  
Mozambique  25.20  
Nepal  33.00  
Niger  No Data  
Nigeria  20.86  
Rwanda  30.17  
Senegal  17.49  
Tajikistan  24.95  
Tanzania  31.08  
Uganda  25.61  
Zambia  5.25 
AVERAGE  25.30  
Source: World Bank  