New landscapes of
water equality and inclusion
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023
International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 2020. IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023: new landscapes of 
water equality and inclusion. Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 16p.
doi: https://doi.org/10.5337/2020.205 
/ gender equality / inclusion / strategies / organizational change / water security / water systems / digital innovation / data 
management / Sustainable Development Goals / social inequalities / equity / women / social development / empowerment 
/ structural change / climate change / resilience / risk reduction / food systems / ecosystems / water use / multiple use / 
agricultural research for development / research programmes / CGIAR / research institutions / intervention / stakeholders / 
policies / knowledge management / capacity building /
ISBN 978-92-9090-900-2
Copyright © 2020 by IWMI. All rights reserved. IWMI encourages the use of its material provided that the organization is 
acknowledged and kept informed in all such instances.
Front cover photograph: A female smallholder farmer setting up a solar-powered pump to irrigate her home garden in 
Danghesta village, Dangila district, Amhara region, Ethiopia (photo: Mulugeta Ayene/WLE).New landscapes of
water equality and inclusion
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-20232
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023Contents
Overview 3
A Strategic Reflection 5
 Building on Our Learning 5
 Looking to New Horizons 7
A Theory of Change and Program of Action 8
 What We Should Be Doing 8
  Bridging Knowledge Gaps 9
  Fixing Systems 9
  Catalyzing Transformation 9
 How We Should Do It: An Action Plan 11
  Action on Data Gaps 11
  Strengthening Our Systems Understandings 11
  Working Closely with Others on a Shared Agenda 11
Annexes 13
 References 13
 Glossary 16
List of Figures
Figure 1 Barriers to Gender Equality and Inclusion 5
Figure 2 Theory of Change in IWMI’s Gender and Inclusion Strategy 8
Figure 3 Critical Questions under IWMI’s Three Strategic Programs 10
Figure 4 Timeline of Actions to Achieve Change 123Overview 
The Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023 of 
the International Water Management Institute 
(IWMI) supports implementation of the IWMI 
Strategy 2019-20231. This is done by ensuring 
that gender equality and inclusion are central to 
the Institute’s three Strategic Programs – water, 
food and ecosystems; water, climate change and 
resilience; and water, growth and inclusion – and 
to its fourth crosscutting program pillar on digital 
innovations. 
IWMI’s mission is to provide water solutions for 
sustainable, climate-resilient development. This 
responds to international policy concerns about 
global systems changing in ways that heighten the 
vulnerability of millions of poor people, impact 
on species diversity, and ultimately, risk future 
achievement of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)2 . 
IWMI’s past research on gender and water, over 
many decades, in Asia, Africa and the Middle East 
shows that real progress cannot be achieved if 
water investments, innovations and interventions 
do not respond to the complexities of inequality 
and exclusion, including the rapid nature of food, 
water, climate and social system transformations. 
This Strategy builds on this work portfolio, including 
incorporating the following key learning points: 
1. Inequality and gender intersections shape 
development outcomes: Unequal rights, 
responsibilities, resources and opportunities 
between genders3  are crosscut by disparities 
in age, disability, ethnicity, religion, caste and 
class. These result in disparities in power, 
privilege, asset ownership, the burden of 
risks, and the distribution of opportunities 
for different groups of women, men and 
other gender identities. The impacts of these 
intersectional inequalities on food, water and 
income security are often acute, but, more 
broadly, affect the achievement of global 
social and economic well-being, especially under conditions of climate uncertainty. 
Ignoring these intersections renders the 
most marginalized largely invisible, and risks 
missing the overall SDG goal of ‘leaving no 
one behind’.
2. Gender equality is central to more effective 
and equitable systems of resource 
governance: Gender inequalities shape rights 
to, and use of water, land and other natural 
resources. They also shape how decisions 
are made, for example, on labor roles and 
responsibilities in collecting and managing 
water, who participates and how in decision-
making, and how benefits are shared along 
water and other natural resource value 
chains. Moreover, these inequalities in 
who has power to participate in and make 
decisions over resource allocation and 
management can also determine the winners 
and losers under conditions of climate 
change – including during more frequently-
experienced extreme weather events 
such as droughts and floods. In addition, 
who benefits or loses as a consequence 
of mobility and migration in reaction to 
major systemic transformation is shaped 
by gendered disparities. In sum, gender 
inequalities are a central factor in governing 
how resilient people are to change, how 
able they are to react to change, and how 
impacts, both negative and positive, are felt 
across different social and political contexts. 
3. Gender equality and inclusion are key to 
sustainable and equitable systems-level 
solutions: The preceding two learning areas 
point to the need for a rethink on how to 
tackle change at a more systemic level – 
including building more evidentially equal 
institutions at all levels. As a research-for-
development (R4D) organization, this means 
bringing together our understanding of 
systems through combining biophysical and 
environmental sciences with socioeconomic 
1 IWMI Strategy 2019-2023 - https://www.iwmi.org/about/iwmi-strategy-2019-2023
2 Key policy documents to which these program areas respond include the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) Paris Agreement, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and 
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).
3 including women, men, transgender and intersex people (UN Women).
Overview 4
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023and political-legal analyses, while ensuring 
that we fully understand the intersections 
between systems and how these shape the 
institutional environment with which and in 
which we work. This will inform better actions 
towards achieving more transformative 
solutions, as well as supporting solutions 
that more fully incorporate public 
participation and collaboration (e.g., citizen 
science and local community participation), 
thereby increasing the agency of those often 
least able to tackle their own inequalities.
4. A Gender Transformative Approach 
(GTA) informs this Strategy. Guided by 
this approach, we aim to reverse gender 
inequalities by identifying, disrupting and 
reversing intersections that sustain and 
sometimes exacerbate systemic inequalities 
in societies and economies at different 
scales. While continuing to address the 
“symptoms” of gender inequalities by 
enhancing women’s individual or collective 
agency in decision-making in water, food, 
climate and growth interventions, we will 
increasingly also tackle “root or systemic 
causes” of intersectional inequalities (CGIAR 
Research Program on Aquatic Agricultural 
Systems 2012). This will entail addressing 
‘nested social and power relations … 
behaviors, norms and structures that 
underlie social inequalities’ (ibid.) in relation 
to food and water system interactions in 
smallholder agriculture, climate change 
resilience, migration and economic policy 
arenas, and in digital innovations for social 
transformation. 
What will we do? Taking forward a 
transdisciplinary, multi-systems approach, we 
will focus, in particular, on strengthening how 
we understand and respond to gender and 
inclusion within rapidly changing food system 
transformations, climate resilience strategies and 
practices, economic growth policy, and new forms 
of digital economies under the emerging Fourth 
Industrial Revolution (4IR). Our work in these 
areas will focus on the following three pillars: 1. Bridging knowledge gaps: We will deliver 
robust, granular and scalar data to 
key stakeholders in ways that also offer 
actionable approaches to tackling systemic 
barriers to gender equality and inclusion. 
This involves identifying and mapping 
critical gender and inclusion knowledge 
gaps through research and engagement with 
grassroots stakeholders, policy makers and 
practitioners, and ultimately supporting 
more collaborative understanding of key data 
bottlenecks and biases that lead to persistent 
inequalities.
2. Fixing systems: We will lead by example and 
facilitate capacity strengthening and change 
processes, leading to more gender-equal and 
inclusive institutions. Using transdisciplinary 
methods, and incorporating innovative tools 
and methods, we will better analyze and 
interpret patterns of change at different 
levels, and identify the most appropriate 
R4D interventions to support more inclusive 
water institutions and governance systems in 
rapidly-changing global contexts.
3. Catalyzing transformation: We will 
innovate with policy brokers and gender 
champions to mobilize transformative water 
investments, innovations and interventions. 
Working with key strategic partners in global 
knowledge and policy communities, we will 
champion gender equality and inclusion, 
influencing both water policy and practice, 
and legislative processes. This will include 
catalyzing investment approaches and 
supporting innovations that deliver more 
inclusive and water-secure solutions across 
the whole community of water users. 
In taking forward these three pillars, our work 
will align with the One CGIAR goals, including 
strengthening and amplifying our impact through 
championing water, gender equality and inclusion 
under the CGIAR Generating Evidence and New 
Directions for Equitable Results (GENDER) 
Platform4 . This implies working towards the 
platform goal to ‘achieve a new normal: a world 
4  CGIAR Gender Platform - https://www.cgiar.org/research/program-platform/cgiar-gender-platform/5in which gender equality drives a transformation 
towards equitable, sustainable, productive and 
climate-resilient food systems’. 
IWMI will also focus on strengthening the 
ways in which we work, by further investing in equality, diversity and inclusion across our own 
organizational structure, and ensuring that we 
track and measure our organizational progress, 
reflecting closely the newly-adopted Framework 
and Action Plan for Gender, Diversity and 
Inclusion in CGIAR’s Workplaces (2020).
Figure 1. Barriers to gender equality and inclusion.
Systemic
barriersStructural
barriers
▪ Unequal assets, 
capabilities, lack of 
agency 
▪ Socially-deﬁned roles, 
identities, 
responsibilities and 
opportunities 
▪ Complex inequalities 
through intersections, 
including gender and 
age, class, race, 
ethnicity, religion, caste, 
disability, etc. ▪ Masculinities across 
institutions 
(households, 
community, local to 
global markets, state 
and civil society 
entities)
▪ Cultures of privilege, 
hierarchy and 
exclusion at scale, 
and lack of tools to 
assess and act on 
dimensions of power▪ Climate challenges, 
agroecological speciﬁcities and 
markets that do not consider the 
needs and realities of the most 
marginalized
▪ Knowledge, technology and 
economies that assume 
homogeneity, or ignore or further 
inequalities 
▪ Distance, disconnect, language, 
skill sets and other exclusion 
barriers that disable individual 
and/or collective initiatives to 
transformative changeEntry
barriers
A Strategic ReflectionA Strategic Reflection
Building on Our Learning
At a global level, there has been important 
progress in tackling inequalities, but much 
remains to be done, and there is no longer room 
for complacency. Over many decades, IWMI’s 
research has demonstrated that focusing on 
women is both necessary and important, but also 
insufficient to capture – let alone reverse – deep-
rooted inequalities in diverse contexts. 
Critical reviews of irrigation design, infrastructure, 
management, access and outcomes in the 1990s 
revealed the gendered nature of access to, use 
of and decision-making within irrigation systems 
and services (van Koppen and Mahmud 1995; 
Zwarteveen and Neupane 1996; Zwarteveen 
1997; Meinzen-Dick and Zwarteveen 1998), as 
well as the legal pluralities in claiming rights to water (van Koppen and Mahmud 1995). This work 
illustrated that, while the technical and financial 
aspects of service delivery are important, water 
use, access, management and decision-making 
are directly impacted by gender-power relations, 
which are both entrenched, as well as contextual 
and evolving (Clement 2013; Sugden 2014; 
Balasubramanya 2019). 
Our outputs from this and subsequent periods 
included important tools and approaches to 
assess, plan for and ensure gender and inclusion 
in irrigation – such as the Gender Performance 
Indicator for Irrigation (van Koppen 2002) and the 
Gender in Irrigation Learning and Improvement 
Tool (GILIT) (Lefore et al. 2017). At the same 
time, our work has helped shine a light on the 
structurally-embedded nature of inequalities and 
systemic barriers to change. 6
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023This increasingly discernible “knot of inequalities” 
can only be untied when we know where to start, 
and we know such processes of transformative 
change will take time. Figure 1 illustrates, 
conceptually, how these barriers are co-related, 
and how non-physical and physical system 
interactions often work to reinforce inequalities, 
whether deliberately or inadvertently. 
Our work in more recent years has highlighted key 
starting points in effecting change, moving from 
how inequalities are constructed to exploring 
how to tackle these structures of inequality 
across a range of water systems and management 
processes. Notable examples are described below:
Visibility is key: At a more generic level, our 
research has contributed to rendering visible what 
are often invisible gender inequalities in water 
access, use, ownership and control. This process 
of ‘revealing’ can shift water policy discourse from 
‘management’ to ‘governance’ of water, enabling 
official and nongovernmental practitioners 
to achieve more gender-responsive water 
governance through understanding the impacts of 
inequality on wider social development. Without 
visibility, structures of inequality can willingly or 
inadvertently be allowed to persist. Revealing 
their presence is a powerful tool in tackling them. 
One water, multiple-use water services (MUS): 
Water is a complex resource, used across 
multiple domains and with a variety of impacts 
by social groups. IWMI’s research in Sri Lanka first 
demonstrated the mismatch between interlinked 
domestic and productive water needs of rural 
communities and sectorally planned, designed 
and delivered irrigation systems and services 
(Bakker et al. 1999). This work helped guide 
a growing body of researchers, practitioners 
and policy makers to develop and implement 
Multiple-use water Services (MUS). Now an 
established policy intervention and strategy for 
water resources planning in different countries, 
MUS has been identified as crucial to addressing 
interlinked domestic and productive water needs 
of poor, marginalized rural communities (van 
Koppen and Hussain 2007; van Koppen et al. 
2009; van Koppen and Smits 2010; Renault et 
al. 2013; van Koppen 2017). Water may come from a single source, but it is used in multiple 
daily activities, all of which invariably contribute 
to income, health, education and other social 
development outcomes.
Collective action works: A key challenge is how 
to tackle gender inequalities at scale in situations 
of widespread poverty and marginality. Research 
on poverty hot spots in South Asia, including 
the Eastern Gangetic Plains (EGP) of India and 
Nepal, shows how multidimensional disparities 
(often nested within one another) can deeply 
affect food and water security. How should 
institutions respond to these competing priorities 
and complexities? One option has been to build 
solutions through agricultural collectives of 
women. In establishing these collectives, farmers 
can pay closer attention to disparities of caste, 
ethnicity and religion, and work towards more 
collective solutions to, for example, accessing 
technologies and inputs that improve dry-season 
farming. This can enable key income-generating 
opportunities in the context of out-migration of 
men and the wider ‘feminization’ of agriculture. 
A systemic body of research on these issues in 
the EGP has informed the setting up of gender-
inclusive agricultural collectives (Sugden 2009, 
2013; Sugden et al. 2017; Bunting et al. 2016; 
Leder et al. 2019) and led to the development 
of the Migration, Agriculture and Resilience: 
Initiative for Sustainability (MARIS) network, 
which links water management to migration and 
rural transformations. 
Management and inclusion are reinforcing: In 
rapidly-evolving social and political contexts in 
Central Asia in the post-Soviet era, IWMI’s work 
in Tajikistan has demonstrated how the efficiency 
and functionality of large-scale irrigation 
depends on gender-equitable management5 
(Balasubramanya 2019). This has led to irrigation 
management and agricultural extension that 
target and support women, and in turn, helped 
to increase incomes, and improve women’s 
bargaining and negotiating capabilities. 
Overcoming resistance: In spite of growing 
volumes of guidelines and tool kits enabling 
more effective planning, design, implementation 
and monitoring of gender-responsive irrigation 
5 By the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) - Why women are key for water management in Tajikistan 
(https://farmingfirst.org/2018/07/why-women-are-key-for-water-management-in-tajikistan/).76 By the CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems (WLE) - Why we need to discuss masculinity in the water sector 
(https://wle.cgiar.org/thrive/2018/06/26/why-we-need-discuss-masculinity-water-sector); and Participatory gender training for 
community groups (https://wle.cgiar.org/solutions/participatory-gender-training-community-groups).   management and technologies, structures 
and cultures still serve to resist greater gender 
equality. On the one hand, IWMI-led research in 
four countries shows that ‘standardized measures’ 
of women’s empowerment tend to differ 
significantly according to complex experiences 
of food security and agency by women in diverse 
local contexts (Clement et al. 2019). On the other 
hand, there are enduring gender biases across 
the water sector that help the concentration of 
power in particular groups. The fact that water 
management organizations in most countries 
consist largely of men is an outcome of these 
deep-rooted social inequalities and biases, as 
well as a key reason why water infrastructure 
and technology has not enabled more gender-
equitable ‘patterns of water work and divisions 
of water rights and responsibilities’ (Zwarteveen 
2008, 111). Our work in this area continues6.
Risk mitigation should be gender responsive: As 
the world becomes potentially more vulnerable 
to climate change and other risks, gender-
responsive and socially-inclusive risk mitigation 
tools and approaches will become increasingly 
important to enhance climate-resilient responses, 
including responses targeting the most 
marginalized households and communities. This 
includes scaling up approaches to risk mitigation 
through measures that are more adaptable and 
actionable for the private sector, for example, 
in countries such as Bangladesh that are highly 
vulnerable to climate risks. In South Asia, climate 
change exacerbates water, food and growth 
challenges, affecting approximately 27 million 
people annually and causing economic losses 
of over USD 1 billion. IWMI’s recent research 
(Aheeyar et al. 2019) shows how ‘risk transfer 
mechanisms’, such as weather index insurance, 
may reinforce rather than reduce gender 
inequality (Aheeyar et al. 2019). This work now 
informs a more systematic approach to address 
social exclusion in market-based flood insurance 
by a leading market agency in Bangladesh, Green 
Delta Insurance Company Limited, which aims 
to target insurance to marginalized farmers and 
sharecroppers.Looking to New Horizons
At present, most development institutions rely 
on traditional social and economic analyses of 
gender inequality and exclusion. The strengths 
of such analyses are evident, but there are also 
limitations (World Bank 2020). Capturing data 
on complex water, food and climate processes 
requires detailed primary research and analysis. 
In rapidly-evolving situations, this may mean 
significant time lags between data collection, 
the generation of research results, and their 
interpretation and application. An ability to 
capture, interpret and act upon data on rapidly-
evolving mobility, social interaction and economic 
issues at scale is a growing need.
Context-specific data combined with smarter, 
more data-rich environments can help us 
understand new factors impacting development 
outcomes, including, but not limited to, those 
presented by the rapidly-evolving digital 
economy. We need to understand these new 
knowledge environments to both enable clearer 
analysis of emerging trends, correlations and 
patterns of change across larger geographies, as 
well as to detect and avoid potential researcher 
and data biases. The latter, in particular, is a 
high risk factor in furthering exclusions and 
inequalities (O’Neil 2016). Tools to assess 
behaviors and attitudes, and thereby ways to 
drive change at scale can help address the 
complexities of inequality and exclusion in this 
new digital age.
For IWMI, in practice, this means we need to 
work not just on the structures and institutions 
of inequality that are in a conventional sense 
‘institutionalized’ in organizational rules, norms, 
laws and procedures, but also on those that are 
built within ‘digital structures’ and provide ‘new 
opportunities for making progress’, including 
utilizing these new technologies to unpick 
structural barriers and biases to gender equality 
(OECD 2018). 
This Strategy will need to combine these new 
challenge areas with research on existing structural 
A Strategic Reflection8
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023
Inputs
▪ Research staﬀ and 
funded projects 
across IWMI's three 
Strategic Programs 
and fourth 
crosscutting 
program pillar on 
digital innovations
▪ Eﬀective 
communications 
and innovative 
partnerships▪ More inclusive food, climate 
and growth, and digital 
innovation policies and 
practices achieved in IWMI's 
target geographies
▪ Structural patterns of 
inequality disrupted and new 
ways of tracking and 
evaluating impacts 
established
▪ Global partnerships on 
gender and inclusion tackle 
water security at scale more 
coherently and eﬀectively ▪ New research outputs bridge 
knowledge gaps 
▪ Strengthened capacity and 
organizational change help ﬁx 
structural and systemic 
inequalities
▪ New innovations help 
catalyze transformation in 
investments and intervention
▪ A suite of policy engagements 
and practical solutions target 
gender equality and inclusion 
informing IWMI's Strategic 
Programs on water and food, 
climate and growthActions Resultsconditions that reproduce inequalities, picking up 
on research that identifies the need to go beyond 
specific sectoral interventions alone (Clement et 
al. 2019), and avoid over-privileging the male-
female binary over other issues of poverty and 
marginalization. For instance, our research in 
Nepal shows that inequalities by gender are deeply 
crosscut by class and caste. This combining of 
research with structural reform in Nepal is key to 
achieving the kind of change we seek.
Elsewhere, our work on the legal structures 
inhibiting reforms in sub-Saharan Africa shows 
that in Malawi, Kenya, South Africa, Uganda and 
Zimbabwe, inequalities persist because policy 
reforms are embedded in colonially-established 
statutory laws – in short, in regional histories that 
reach far into the present. Key recommendations 
include reversing historical wrongs by 
acknowledging and ensuring traditional, 
customary rights to water alongside colonially-established statutory privileges (van Koppen et al. 
2019). In short, tackling the challenges of history 
through better understanding of the present, and 
changing the future based on this understanding.
Above all, our approaches will need to be heavily 
invested in partnerships and collaborations, 
both of which are essential to facilitating 
transformational change, especially in complex 
(and contested) social and political contexts. 
In Myanmar, we are embarking on just such a 
process. On a new project (2019-2021) supported 
by the CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land, 
Ecosystems (WLE), IWMI researchers work with 
the Gulf of Mottama (GoM) project to provide 
evidence with which to tackle root causes of 
gender inequality and exclusion in wetland 
management. The GoM project is funded by the 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
(SDC) and involves a range of local, national and 
international partners in Myanmar. 
A Theory of Change and Program of Action
What We Should Be Doing
Looking broadly at R4D interventions beyond water systems alone and beyond IWMI, we distill our theory 
of change in Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Theory of change in IWMI’s Gender and Inclusion Strategy.9The three pillars of this Strategy to enable 
achievement of our results are outlined below.
Bridging Knowledge Gaps
We will deliver robust, granular and scalar 
data to key stakeholders in ways that also offer 
actionable approaches to tackling systemic 
barriers to gender inequality and exclusion.
This involves identifying and mapping critical 
gender and inclusion knowledge gaps through 
research and engagement with grassroots 
stakeholders, policy makers and practitioners, 
and ultimately supporting more collaborative 
understanding of key data bottlenecks and biases 
that lead to persistent inequalities.
Data and evidence on gender inequality do not 
easily translate into solutions for change. One 
of the biggest challenges in addressing gender 
inequality is the mismatch between research – 
which tends to focus on ‘how we got here’, i.e., 
how inequality by gender is entrenched, complex 
and persisting – and the development agenda or 
‘how to get out of here’ (Okali 2012). 
What we want to achieve: We want to tackle 
knowledge gaps and deliver gender data 
that enable key development partners and 
stakeholders to shape future water investments, 
innovations and interventions, including ways 
of building in smarter monitoring of changes in 
environments of inequality. The aim is to enable 
faster feedback on progress and, therefore, 
greater capacity for adaptive management of 
change within rapidly-evolving economies and 
societies, including those with high vulnerability 
to economic, social and environmental shocks.
Fixing Systems
We will lead by example and facilitate capacity 
strengthening and organizational change 
processes, supporting more gender-equal and 
inclusive institutions.
The business of mainstreaming gender has 
not resulted in inclusive institutions. There is 
now an emerging consensus that the route to 
fixing gender equality is through fixing systems, including institutions (WEF 2020). However, the 
question remains – how to achieve this? Across 
the board, official, nongovernmental, private 
sector and even community water institutions 
continue to demonstrate structures and cultures 
of male overrepresentation, unequal hierarchies, 
masculine norms and disciplinary silos. Gender 
equality and inclusion trainings, tool kits and, 
more recently, narratives on economic returns to 
addressing gender inequality have not enabled 
sufficient change in the nature of systems.
What we want to achieve: We aim to lead by 
example and enable IWMI to become a more 
inclusive workplace and culture – building more 
systematic gender-based development into all 
our projects and programs, and establishing 
more effective monitoring of progress. In our 
engagements with partners and stakeholders, we 
will move from ‘supply-led’ capacity strengthening 
to more reflexive learning by doing, including the 
establishment of more inclusive organizational 
practices and spaces in all our offices. Working 
outwards through the new CGIAR GENDER 
platform, we will further engage with key drivers 
of change to achieve more uniform inclusivity and 
diversity across CGIAR and its partner institutions.
Catalyzing Transformation
We will innovate with policy brokers and gender 
champions to mobilize transformative water 
investments, innovations and interventions. 
The analysis that ‘inequality keeps widening, 
but it is nothing new’ (WEF 2020) highlights 
the need to achieve ambitious equality and 
inclusion goals in the face of diverse challenges, 
including reductions in development financing. 
Despite growing global policy attention, sufficient 
resources to achieve strategic and sustainable 
gender equality have never been mobilized. In 
2014-2015, it was assessed that only 5% of the 
screened aid of the Development Assistance 
Committee (DAC) members targeted gender 
equality as a principal objective (ADB and UN 
Women 2018), even though the material gains in 
advancing gender equality could amount to USD 
12 trillion being added to global gross domestic 
product (GDP) (Woetzel et al. 2015). 
A Theory of Change and Program of Action10
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023Similarly, investments in water supply and 
sanitation, smallholder agriculture, and economic 
growth targeted at marginalized groups, including 
women, have been historically inappropriate, and 
declined even further in recent years (Ray 2016; 
WEF 2020). In such a context, calling on poor and 
marginalized women to engage in development 
by contributing cash, time and labor to poorly 
designed and financed water infrastructure and 
other services may, perversely, reinforce gender 
inequalities. What we want to achieve: For each of our three 
Strategic Programs, we will engage with key policy 
drivers and gender champions, and together 
with them, inform and mobilize transformative 
investments, innovations and interventions that 
tackle food, climate and growth challenges and 
specific issues related to digital innovation.
A first key step is to explore a range of critical 
questions under IWMI’s three Strategic Programs, as 
outlined in Figure 3.
Improve Food
SecurityFOOD▪ How well do we understand complex, rapidly-evolving and interlinked 
water, food and ecosystem inequalities? Are current framings of 
agricultural and irrigation intensiﬁcation designed to ensure 
environmental and social sustainability? 
▪ How can interventions for irrigation intensiﬁcation ensure that those left 
furthest behind are not excluded?
▪ How do current trends of out-migration and gender-inequitable access to 
assets and resources aﬀect production and intensiﬁcation targets?
▪ How can gender and inclusion inform nature-based solutions to tackle 
future water challenges?Water, Food and Ecosystems
▪ How do climate-induced changes in water availability, quality and access 
across water sectors aﬀect gender inequalities?
▪ How do the impacts of climate-induced extreme weather events aﬀect 
already-existing inequalities and vulnerabilities? 
▪ What methods and approaches will ensure that technical climate 
solutions do not compromise gender and inclusion objectives? 
▪ What are the key pathways to challenging and reversing gender 
inequality and exclusion in climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience 
initiatives?Water, Climate Change and Resilience
▪ What determines inclusive growth and what types of interventions will 
achieve eﬃcient resource use taking into account equality and inclusion?
▪ Can sustainable intensiﬁcation be a vehicle of economic growth under 
conditions of lack of land tenure and landlessness, and lack of access to 
relevant resources, infrastructure and services? 
▪ Do global measures of inclusion and empowerment reﬂect complex local 
realities, including the nature of circular economies? If not, what 
methods, measures and data will help bridge these gaps and support 
more inclusive planning?Water, Growth and InclusionAdapt to & Mitigate
Climate ChangeCLIMATE
Promote Sustainable
GrowthGROWTH
Figure 3. Critical questions under IWMI’s three Strategic Programs.
We will build these questions into our programs as we take this Strategy forward.11Action on Data Gaps
Based on framings around the core 
questions under each Strategic 
Program in Figure 3, we will identify 
knowledge gaps and data needs, and 
map the processes and R4D approaches that 
can help to bridge these needs and gaps. This 
will include adopting contemporary tools and 
approaches, such as the Individual Deprivation 
Measure, to better map scalar, cross-sectoral 
and multiple dimensions of gender inequality and 
exclusion (see OECD 2018), and bridge gender 
theories and approaches with new innovations 
and tools (see Collett and Dillon 2019).  
By 2022, IWMI will seek to have 
established new transdisciplinary, 
cross-regional Gender and Inclusion 
work, which will help shape and define 
new water and gender strategies in different 
policy and practice constituencies in Asia and 
Africa. This will be supported by Gender Focal 
Points and an Action Plan on Gender and Inclusion 
under each IWMI Strategic Program and its 
crosscutting program pillar on digital innovations. 
The gender program will build on IWMI’s growing 
partnerships with policy institutions such as the 
African Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW), the 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands and others.
Strengthening Our Systems 
Understandings
By 2021, a ‘Gender Research at IWMI 
Tracker’ will set in place a Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning (MEL) system 
that allows reporting on gender 
outcomes and impacts as a crosscutting objective 
under each IWMI Strategic Program, reporting How We Should Do It: An Action Plan
to the CGIAR Strategy and Results Framework 
(2016-2030). Each project entered into IWMI’s 
internal systems will be assigned a Gender and 
Inclusion code outlining the type of intervention, 
its duration, geographical location, variety of 
outputs and the level of partnership involved. 
IWMI Strategic Programs will assign gender focal 
points.
By 2023, gender outputs and outcomes 
from the above initiatives and from 
other ongoing gender research under 
IWMI’s Strategic Programs will be 
reviewed and collated into a new policy-relevant 
report on ‘Transforming Food, Climate and 
Growth Systems to Achieve Gender Equality and 
Inclusion’. This will form the basis for a series of 
meetings convened with partners in the same 
year. 
Working Closely with Others on a 
Shared Agenda
IWMI will prioritize work with the CGIAR 
GENDER Platform, including developing 
specific research activities on systems 
thinking, and untying gender and 
inclusion inequalities. A key early focus will be 
structural governance systems of transforming 
water management in federal systems, building 
on IWMI’s work in India, Nepal, Ethiopia and 
elsewhere.
IWMI will strengthen its alliances with 
networks working on water, poverty, 
growth, equity and sustainability, 
including focusing specifically on the 
intersections between water management, water 
supply and circular economy issues across urban, 
peri-urban and rural environments. Action
Action
ActionAction
Action
ActionOur action plan will be the foundation for the three pillars of this Strategy: (i) bridging 
knowledge gaps, (ii) fixing systems, and (iii) catalyzing transformation. We will build on the work 
carried out by IWMI’s three Strategic Programs, as well as its fourth crosscutting program pillar 
on digital innovations. 
A Theory of Change and Program of Action12
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023A gender and inclusion plan of 
action is produced for each IWMI 
Strategic Program taking into 
account thematic and regional 
prioritiesStrategic cross-IWMI Strategic 
Program and cross-regional 
gender project
2020
IWMI's gender and inclusion 
research contributes strategically 
to new water policy and R4D 
interventions tackling gender 
inequalities2023 2022▪ Big picture, transdisciplinary 
program on gender equality and 
inclusion demonstrates 
groundbreaking new research, builds 
gender capacity of stakeholders and 
enables higher-level policy impact
▪ Gender focal points established in 
each IWMI Strategic Program and 
its crosscutting program pillar on 
Digital innovations to help connect 
regional teams (West Africa, 
Southern Africa, East Africa, South 
Asia, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, 
Middle East and North Africa) on 
gender and inclusion priorities▪ IWMI organizes and leads a series 
of international meetings on gender 
and water
▪ IWMI's Gender and Inclusion 
Strategy steers policy directions in 
food, climate and growth 
interventions across a range of 
institutional environmentsIWMI’s timeline for actions to achieve change is outlined in Figure 4. 
Figure 4. Timeline of actions to achieve change.13Annexes
References
ADB (Asian Development Bank); UN Women. 2018. Gender equality and the sustainable development 
goals in Asia and the Pacific: Baseline and pathways for transformative change by 2030. Manila, 
Philippines: Asian Development Bank (ADB); Bangkok, Thailand: UN Women.
Aheeyar, M.; de Silva, S.; Senaratna Sellamuttu, S. 2019. Pilot evaluation of the Index Based Flood 
Insurance in Bihar, India: Lessons of experiences. Technical report. Colombo, Sri Lanka: International 
Water Management Institute (IWMI). CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems (WLE). 
31p.
Bakker, M.; Barker, R.; Meinzen-Dick, R.; Konradsen, F. (Eds.). 1999. Multiple uses of water in irrigated 
areas: A case study from Sri Lanka. Colombo Sri Lanka. International Water Management Institute 
(IWMI). 55p. (SWIM Paper 8). https://doi.org/10.3910/2009.373
Balasubramanya, S. 2019. Effects of training duration and the role of gender on farm participation in water 
user associations in Southern Tajikistan: Implications for irrigation management. Agricultural Water 
Management 216: 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2019.01.019
Bunting, S.W.; Luo, S.; Cai, K.; Kundu, N.; Lund, S.; Mishra, R.; Ray, D.; Smith, K.G.; Sugden, F. 2016. 
Integrated action planning for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of highland aquatic 
resources: Evaluating outcomes for the Beijiang River, China. Journal of Environmental Planning and 
Management 59(9): 1580–1609. https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1083414
CGIAR Research Program on Aquatic Agricultural Systems. 2012. Building coalitions, creating change: An 
agenda for gender transformative research in development. Workshop Report: AAS-2012-31. Penang, 
Malaysia: CGIAR Research Program on Aquatic Agricultural Systems (AAS).
Clement, F. 2013. From water productivity to water security: A paradigm shift? In: Lankford, B.; Bakker, K.; 
Zeitoun, M.; Conway, D. (eds.), Water security: Principles, perspectives and practices. London, UK: 
Routledge. pp. 148–165.
Clement, F.; Buisson, M.-C.; Leder, S.; Balasubramanya, S.; Saikia, P.; Bastakoti, R.; Karki, E.; van Koppen, 
B. 2019. From women’s empowerment to food security: Revisiting global discourses through a cross-
country analysis. Global Food Security 23: 160–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.05.003
Collett, C.; Dillon, S. 2019. AI and gender: Four proposals for future research. Cambridge, UK: The 
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence. Available at http://lcfi.ac.uk/media/uploads/files/
AI_and_Gender___4_Proposals_for_Future_Research.pdf (accessed May 22, 2020).
Filardi, M.E; Prato, S. 2018. Reclaiming the future of food: Challenging the dematerialization of food 
systems. In: When food becomes immaterial: Confronting the digital age. Right to Food and Nutrition 
Watch. Issue 10. pp. 6–13.
Leder, S.; Sugden, F.; Raut, M.; Ray, D.; Saikia, P. 2019. Ambivalences of collective farming: Feminist 
political ecologies from eastern India and Nepal. International Journal of the Commons 13(1): 105–129. 
http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.917
Annexes14
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023Lefore, N.; Weight, E.; Rubin, D. 2017. Gender in irrigation learning and improvement tool. Colombo, Sri 
Lanka: International Water Management Institute (IWMI). CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land 
and Ecosystems (WLE). 40p. Available at https://doi.org/10.5337/2017.203 (accessed on May 21, 
2020).
Meinzen-Dick, R.; Zwarteveen, M. 1998. Gendered participation in water management: Issues and 
illustrations from water users’ associations in South Asia. Agriculture and Human Values 15(4):  337–
345.  https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007533018254
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2018. OECD Science, technology and 
innovation outlook 2018: Adapting to technological and societal disruption. Paris, France: OECD 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-en 
Okali, C. 2012. Gender analysis: Engaging with rural development and agricultural policy processes. Future 
Agricultures Consortium Working Paper 026. Brighton, UK: Future Agricultures Consortium. 18p. 
O’Neil, C. 2016. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens 
democracy. UK: Penguin Random House. 259p.
Ray, I. 2016. Transformative investments for gender-equal sustainable development. In: Leach, M. (ed.). 
Gender equality and sustainable development. London and New York: Earthscan, Routledge. pp.133–
155.
Renault, D.; Wahaj, R.; Smits, S. 2013. Multiple uses of water services in large irrigation systems: Auditing 
and planning modernization - The MASSMUS approach. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 67. Rome, 
Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 227p.
Sugden, F. 2009. Neo-liberalism, markets and class structures on the Nepali lowlands: The 
political economy of agrarian change. Geoforum 40(4): 634–644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoforum.2009.03.010
Sugden, F. 2013. Pre-capitalist reproduction on the Nepal Tarai: Semi-feudal agriculture in an era of 
globalisation. Journal of Contemporary Asia 43(3): 519–545. https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336.2013.
763494 
Sugden, F. 2014. Landlordism, tenants and the groundwater sector: Lessons from the Tarai-Madhesh, 
Nepal. Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 33p. (IWMI Research 
Report 162). https://doi.org/10.5337/2015.204
Sugden, F.; Seddon, D.; Raut, M. 2017. Mapping historical and contemporary agrarian transformations 
and capitalist infiltration in a complex upland environment: A case from Eastern Nepal. Journal of 
Agrarian Change 18(2): 444–472. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12223
van Koppen, B. 2002. A gender performance indicator for irrigation: Concepts, tools and applications. 
Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 42p. (IWMI Research Report 
59). https://doi.org/10.3910/2009.064
van Koppen, B. 2017. Upscaling MUS [Multiple-use water services] at global levels: Lessons from the past 
and opportunities for the future. In: Joshi, N.M.; Subedee, S.; Pandey, D.R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 
Seventh International Seminar on Irrigation in Local Adaptation and Resilience, Kathmandu, Nepal, 
April 11-12, 2017. Kathmandu, Nepal: Farmer Managed Irrigation Systems Promotion Trust. pp.89–101.15van Koppen, B.; Mahmud, S. 1995. Women and water-pumps in Bangladesh: The impact of participation in 
irrigation groups on women’s status. Wageningen, Netherlands: Wageningen University.
van Koppen, B.; Hussain, I. 2007. Gender and irrigation: Overview of issues and options. Irrigation and 
Drainage 56(2-3): 289–298. https://doi.org/10.1002/ird.296
van Koppen, B.; Smits, S.; Moriarty, P.; Penning de Vries, F.; Mikhail, M.; Boelee, E. 2009. Climbing the 
water ladder:  Multiple-use  water  services  for  poverty  reduction. Technical Paper Series No. 52. 
The  Hague,  the Netherlands: IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre; Colombo, Sri Lanka: 
International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
van Koppen, B.; Smits, S. 2010. Multiple-use water services: climbing the water ladder. Waterlines 29(1): 
5–20. https://doi.org/10.3362/1756-3488.2010.002
van Koppen, B.; Schreiner, B.; Sithole, P. 2019. Decolonising peasants’ marginalisation in African water law. 
International Journal of Water Law 26(2): 51–61. 
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2020. Global gender gap report 2020. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Economic Forum. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf
Woetzel, J.; Madgavkar, A.; Ellingrud, K.; Labaye, E.; Devillard, S.; Kutcher, E.; Manyika, E.; Dobbs, R.; 
Krishnan, M. 2015. The power of parity: How advancing women’s equality can add $12 trillion to global 
growth. Washington, DC, USA: McKinsey Global Institute.
World Bank. 2020. World development report 2021: Data for better lives. Concept note. Washington, DC: 
World Bank Group.
Zwarteveen, M.Z. 1997. Water: From basic need to commodity: A discussion on gender and water rights 
in the context of irrigation. World Development 25(8): 1335–1349. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-
750X(97)00032-6
Zwarteveen, M. 2008. Men, masculinities and water powers in irrigation. Water Alternatives 1(1):111–130. 
www.water-alternatives.org
Zwarteveen, M.Z.; Neupane, N. 1996. Free-riders or victims: Women’s nonparticipation in irrigation 
management in Nepal’s Chhattis Mauja irrigation scheme. Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Irrigation 
Management Institute (IIMI). 26p. (IIMI Research Report 7). https://doi.org/10.3910/2009.016
Annexes16
IWMI Gender and Inclusion Strategy 2020-2023Glossary
4IR: Fourth Industrial Revolution
Citizen science: the practice of public participation and collaboration in scientific research to increase 
scientific knowledge
Disparity: a lack of equality or similarity, especially in a way that is not fair
Equality: every individual has an equal opportunity to make the most of their lives and talents, with a 
focus on ‘sameness’ in outcomes 
Equity: based on the idea of moral equality, and the principle that people should be treated as equals, 
with a focus on processes and the fairness of distribution
Gender responsive: the particular needs, priorities and realities of men and women are recognized and 
adequately addressed in design and application, so that both men and women can equally benefit
Inclusion: the process of improving the ability, opportunity and dignity of those disadvantaged to take part 
in society
Individual deprivation measure: a new, gender-sensitive and multidimensional measure of poverty. It 
has been developed to assess deprivation at the individual level and overcome the limitations of current 
approaches which measure poverty at the household level
Intersectionality/intersectional: the interconnected nature of social categorizations such as race, 
class and gender as they apply to a given individual or group, regarded as creating overlapping and 
interdependent systems of discrimination or disadvantage
Masculinity: the social roles, behaviors and meanings prescribed for men
R4D: Research for Development
Transdisciplinary: a research strategy that crosses many disciplinary boundaries to create a holistic 
approach
Gender transformative approach: a way to address the foundations of gender inequity and unequal 
power relations, with a focus on transforming gender relations to be more equitableThe International Water Management Institute (IWMI) is an international, 
research-for-development organization that works with governments, 
civil society and the private sector to solve water problems in developing 
countries and scale up solutions. Through partnership, IWMI combines 
research on the sustainable use of water and land resources, knowledge 
services and products with capacity strengthening, dialogue and policy 
analysis to support implementation of water management solutions for 
agriculture, ecosystems, climate change and inclusive economic growth. 
Headquartered in Colombo, Sri Lanka, IWMI is a CGIAR Research Center and 
leads the CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems (WLE). 
www.iwmi.org
CGIAR is a global research partnership for a food-secure future. CGIAR 
science is dedicated to reducing poverty, enhancing food and nutrition 
security, and improving natural resources and ecosystem services. Its 
research is carried out by 15 CGIAR Centers in close collaboration with 
hundreds of partners, including national and regional research institutes, 
civil society organizations, academia, development organizations and the 
private sector. www.cgiar.orgHeadquarters: 127 Sunil Mawatha, Pelawatte, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka
Mailing address: P. O. Box 2075, Colombo, Sri Lanka
Tel: +94 11 2880000 | Fax: +94 11 2786854
Email: iwmi@cgiar.org
www.iwmi.org
ISBN 978-92-9090-900-2