1
Mobile 
Network 
Operator 
Partnerships 
in Action for 
Health:
A Vietnam case study on mobile network 
operator and Ministry of Health engagement 
for electronic immunization registry 
application
For more information:
Oribusam vellum velitii sserionsecus nonsed quidebis aut est aut officiis quisti blam id maio 
offictur, qui dolupta tectoribus ma dolo veliquiam inuscia int.
Agnis quiasimin rehentem. Ent molor rerior se volum ilicienimus etur alit arum,
 quam autecta tisquos eum vendae quo dit mos voluptium dolorer orehent r
erae parionsequam aut aspelis et, si ne deliquam fuga. Ita se eos volori netThis case study was developed by the Introducing Digital immunization information 
systems - Exchange And Learning project, a collaboration of PATH, the Vietnam Ministry 
of Health, General Department of Preventive Medicine, the Vietnam National Expanded 
Immunization Program, Viettel and authored by PATH.
This work was funded by a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. The views 
expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the Foundation. 
© 2019, PATH. All rights reserved. Cover photo: PATHPartnering with MNO’s to improve the system in Vietnam3
3Mobile Network Operator Partnerships in 
Action for Health: 
A Vietnam case study on mobile network operator and 
Ministry of Health engagement for  
electronic immunization  registry application 
         20194CONTENTS
Abbreviations....................................................................................................................................................5
1. Introduction............. ....................................................................................................................................6
 1.1. Purpose.........................................................................................................................................6
 1.2. Intended audience...................................................................................................................6
 1.3. Methods.......................................................................................................................................6
 1.4. Definition of terms...................................................................................................................7
 1.5. Structure of health centers in Vietnam.............................................................................7
2. Enabling environment: Vietnam .......................................................................................................8
 2.1. Growth of digitalization and mobile technology..........................................................8
 2.2. Build-up to the NIIS..................................................................................................................8
  ImmReg................................................................................................................................10
 2.3. Partnership development....................................................................................................11
  NIIS Technical Working Group......................................................................................12
3. Ministry of Health perspective on partnership..............................................................................13
 3.1. Benefits.......................................................................................................................................13
 3.2. Choosing a moblie network operator: Vietnam..........................................................14
4. MNO perspective on partnership........................................................................................................16
5. Challenges and lessons learned: Vietnam.......................................................................................18
 5.1. Takeaway advice after looking back................................................................................19
6. Future: Where do we go from here?..................................................................................................20
 6.1. Current focus—partnership goals...................................................................................20 
 6.2. Potential projects ...................................................................................................................20
7. References..................................................................................................................................................22Partnering with MNOs5
ABBREVIATIONS
EIR   electronic immunization registry
GDPM   General Department of Preventive Medicine
ImmReg  Digital  Immunization Registry System 
IT   information technology 
mHealth  mobile health
MNO        mobile network operator
MOH   Ministry of Health 
NCD   noncommunicable disease
NEPI   National Expanded Program on Immunization 
NIIS   National Immunization Information System
SMS   short message service
TWG    technical working group 
WHO    World Health Organization   6
1.1.   Purpose
As health experts, governments, and policymakers around the world harmonize their goals to 
improve health outcomes through the use of better data and digital tools, the importance of 
partnerships with key technology stakeholders has become increasingly apparent. With extensive 
reach among populations, resources, and innovative tools, mobile network operators (MNOs) 
have a huge potential to strengthen interconnections between the health and technology 
sectors, and the populations they serve. However, documented guidance on selecting an 
MNO partner, as well as facilitating and maintaining such a partnership, is currently lacking.1
After reviewing the successful 2014 pilot of a digital immunization registry that was implemented 
by the global health nonprofit organization PATH in Ben Tre province,2 the Ministry of Health 
(MOH) of Vietnam partnered with Viettel Business Solutions (Viettel), Vietnam’s largest MNO, and 
PATH to develop and scale up the National Immunization Information System (NIIS), the electronic 
immunization registry (EIR) that is being implemented today. The objective of this case study is 
to share lessons learned from the partnership between MOH, Viettel, and PATH to implement 
and scale up the NIIS. Vietnam’s story of partnership to implement an EIR will ultimately serve 
as a guide for others to effectively build alliances with or as MNOs in order to achieve future 
goals, expand immunization coverage, and improve health outcomes around the world.
1.2.  Intended audience
This case study seeks to benefit any innovator, organization, or government body that is 
considering or engaging in learning, building, facilitating, investing in, or scaling up an 
EIR. Moreover, it provides a pathway for effectively initiating, maintaining, and improving 
partnerships with MNOs, which may be especially relevant in the Mekong region and for other 
organizations working in low- and middle-income countries. Although the findings in this 
report highlight the landscape and resources available in the context of Vietnam, the content 
represents international interests that are borderless and applicable to any country, technology 
provider, organization, or donor seeking guidance on improving health data and outcomes.
1.3.  Methods
This case study was compiled based on interviews with leaders and relevant personnel from 
Viettel, the General Department of Preventive Medicine (GDPM), National Expanded Program 
on Immunization (NEPI), and PATH to gather information from various parties involved in 
the formation of the MNO partnership and the NIIS in Vietnam. In addition, supporting 
documents were referenced for background information on the development of a digital 
immunization registry software; this included PATH reports on pilot projects that influenced 
the NIIS and letters that cited the initiation of Viettel and PATH’s official partnership in regard 
to the NIIS in 2016. Literature from other MNO partnerships, United Nations global guides, 
and Pan American Health Organization case studies were also reviewed for guidance. tents
1. Introduction 
1. IntroductionPartnering with MNOs7
1.4. Definition of terms:   Intended Audience
Mobile network operator:  A wireless service provider or wireless carrier that provides wireless 
communication services to the population targeted. This can include internet capabilities, Wi-Fi, 
mobile applications, and short message service (SMS) and voice functionality. In Vietnam, Viettel 
has the largest number of subscribers.
Mobile health (or mHealth) service provider:  Based on the World Health Organization 
framework, this includes developers and implementors of an mHealth service to the population 
targeted. In this case study, this refers to the MOH, GDPM, NEPI, and PATH, although Viettel also 
helped in the development of the system.
Figure 1. Structure of health centers in Vietnam
National Level Ministry of Health 
National Institutue of Hygiene and 
EpidemiologyGeneral Department of 
Preventive  Medicine
National Expanded Programme on 
Immunization 
Northern Region 
EPI Central Region 
EPI  Southern Region 
EPI Central Highlands
Region 
EPI
Preventative 
Care Centers (28) Preventative 
Care Centers (11) Regional 
Level 
Provincial
Level 
District 
Level District Health 
Centers  District Health 
Centers District Health 
Centers District Health 
Centers Preventative 
Care Centers (20) Preventative 
Care Centers (4) 
Commune Health 
CentersCommune Health 
CentersCommune Health 
CentersCommune Health 
CentersCommune 
Level 
Abbreviation: EPI (Expanded Programme on Immunization) 8
2. Enabling environment:
 Vietnam
2.1. Growth of digitalization and mobile technology
“As MNOs continue to deliver new services for users, mobile communication is an 
ever-evolving industry and is part of everyday life for a growing proportion of the 
world’s population” ,  World Health Organization.
Since the first connection to the internet in 1997, Vietnam has experienced rapid socioeconomic 
development. The country now ranks among the top 20 countries with the largest numbers of 
internet users in the entire world. The growth of internet users in Vietnam jumped from 0.2 percent 
in 2000 to 67 percent in 2017. Additionally, the usage of smartphones and mobile technology 
has rapidly increased in the last decade; the number of smartphone owners increased rapidly, 
over three times from 2013 (20 percent) to 2015 (72 percent), in both rural and urban settings.3
As one of the fastest growing economies in the region, Vietnam is embracing new opportunities.4  
Social and public services in Vietnam are adopting digital tools and moving away from outdated 
and problem-ridden paper-based systems. For example, in 2019, Vietnamese citizens can now 
apply for a birth certificate or driver’s license online rather than use a paper application form.3 
In health care settings, Vietnam’s health facilities are increasingly installing digital systems to 
manage patient records and data and to communicate between clinics. This saves time and money 
for both the public and the government.3 This recent development is more advanced compared to 
neighboring countries and even to some countries all over the world, including some with higher 
gross domestic product.3
Digitalization enables both private and social sectors to increase communication, narrows 
geographic distances, and facilitates access to hard-to-reach populations. Vietnam is fast to 
acknowledge the exciting and innovative benefits from moving to digital systems. 
2.2.  Build-up to the NIIS
Vaccines have saved more lives than any other health innovation in the last 50 years. However, 
in order to maximize their health benefits and decrease deaths from diseases, vaccines must 
be readily available and administered on time. Since 1985, the Vietnam NEPI has successfully 
implemented a nationwide immunization system. In its earlier phases, NEPI relied entirely on 
paper-based methods for immunization record keeping and vaccine supply management and 
tracking. This system created gaps and multiple apparent challenges (see Table 1) in expanding 
immunization coverage. PATH, with the support of global partners, theorized that by transitioning 
from paper to digital records, Vietnam’s immunization system would be able to excel to its full 
lifesaving potential. Following this realization, PATH began brainstorming with NEPI in 2012 on 
innovations that could close information gaps and increase the success of the immunization 
system throughout the country.Partnering with MNO’s to improve the system in Vietnam9
9Challenges of a paper-based system Benefits of moving to digital
Paper-based reporting systems require 
additional work and maintenance which can 
create a significant burden for health care 
workers; this burden only increases with the 
introduction of new vaccinesThe reporting burden can be reduced, 
enabling health care workers to spend more 
time on other tasks.   
Immunization data recorded in the current 
system are often delayed or incomplete, as 
it is necessary to move the data from district 
health centers to the provincial, regional, and 
finally the national level.The completeness and timeliness of 
immunization data can be improved at all 
levels if the reporting data do not need to be 
moved from commune to national level and 
can be inputted into one system.
Immunization data recorded in the current 
paper system are frequently incorrect due to 
estimation and arithmetic errors.The quality and accuracy of information 
available can be improved at all levels by 
having a computer generate the estimate 
and arithmetic. Also, sending SMS reminder 
to caregivers would reduce the errors of 
writing and hand-delivering invitations to 
immunization days at commune health 
centers.
Managers at all levels find it difficult to locate 
specific vaccines in the supply chainReal-time information about vaccines in stock 
can be increased at all levels 
The Vietnamese immunization system relies 
on various administration, storage, and 
reporting procedures. However, there is a 
lack of documented standard operating 
procedures to ensure that these processes are 
conducted correctly and consistently.Efficiency and consistency of performance 
across the NEPI system can be improved 
through the development of high-quality 
standard operating procedures.
World Health Organization (WHO), PATH. Optimize: Vietnam Report. Seattle: PATH, WHO; 2013Table 1.  Benefits of moving to digital immunization registry 10
IMMREG SYSTEM: A FIRST OF ITS KIND IN VIETNAM
ImmReg was a pilot web-based software application that tracked women and children’s 
immunization statuses. It could be accessed via a computer or mobile phone enabling 
health care workers to record and access immunization data in real time and easily generate 
reports at district and provincial levels. ImmReg also sent SMS reminders to caretakers on 
when their child was due for vaccination. The system reduced workload burden at the health 
center level, improved accuracy in data recording and increased on-time vaccination rates. 
ImmReg is an immunization registry software program that was developed in 2012 through 
the collaborative efforts of NEPI and PATH. It was piloted in a district in Ben Tre province in the 
south of Vietnam. The aim of the ImmReg pilot was to address the key challenges with paper-
based immunization registries and improve timelines and coverage of childhood vaccinations. 
In addition to ImmReg, PATH also helped to developed VaxTrak a digital tool for tracking vaccine 
stocks.  In 2014 and 2015, PATH worked with the Ben Tre Provincial Health Department and the 
Preventative Medicine Center  to scale up the system from district to provincial level. Results 
from the ImmReg software pilot showed that transitioning to a digital system increased full 
immunization coverage rates in the first year of life and improved on-time vaccination rates.2
 The NIIS, the EIR currently in place, is the result of the collaboration, integration of ideas, and 
partnership between the MOH, Viettel, NEPI, GDPM, and PATH. The NIIS is now used in all 63 provinces 
across the country; as of July 2019, over 17 million records have been registered into the system.   
Figure 2.  Timeline of PATH involvement in NIIS
• VaxTrack and ImmReg 
integrated into one 
system and scaled up. 
•Evaluation revealed 
the system increased 
on-time vaccination and 
reduced drop-out rates• Developed VaxTrak 
and ImmReg
•Tested in small scale, 
district level pilots
•VaxTrak scaled up 
nationwide by MOH • Transfered ImmReg/
VaxTrak technology 
towards the 
development of the NIIS
• NIIS launched 
nationwide in March 
2017 by MOH
• Focus on increasing 
NIIS uptake and 
improve data quaility 
and data use
• Transition to paperless 
immunization records2012 - 2013 2016 - 20172014 - 2015 2018 - 2019
Abbreviations: ImmReg, Digital Immunization Registry System; MOH, Ministry of Health; NIIS, National Im -
munization Information System.Partnering with MNOs11
2.3. Partnership development 
In May 2016, the Vietnam MOH requested that PATH provide support to MOH and their partner 
Viettel in the formation of the national-EIR, the National Immunization Information Management 
System [now the National Immunization Information System (NIIS)]. The MOH planned to 
integrate the ImmReg and VaxTrak systems into a new software application built and run by the 
MOH. Instead of a contract or memorandum of understanding, MOH sent a request letter to PATH 
asking PATH to assist in the system design, development, and implementation.
In order to facilitate the technology transfer of ImmReg/VaxTrak into the new system (the future 
NIIS), synergistic collaboration and partnership were vital. PATH transferred all technology (data 
flow and database structure design) to Viettel. PATH created a practice system for the Viettel team 
to explore the system. PATH also sent staff members to work at Viettel on the development team 
to analyze the business models and user requirements, as well as the programing team to support 
and catalyze the development process and steer the design to a user-friendly system, based on 
past implementation data (from the Ben Tre pilot).
In March 2017, the collective system, the NIIS, was officially launched by Deputy Prime Minister 
Vu Duc Dam.
 HOW THE NIIS WORKS: 
1
2
3Health workers register pregnant women and 
newborns in the NIIS via smartphone or computer. 
Each child is assigned a unique identification number 
in the system.
The system automatically generates a list of children 
due for vaccinations and sends a text message 
to caretakers to remind them to get their child 
vaccinated.
Caretakers bring the child in for vaccinations; health 
workers enter data on the vaccine, doses, and date 
delivered.
4NIIS provides the commune health worker with 
information about the types and amount of vaccines 
that the center has on hand and needs to administer 
montly. These data are then reported up to the 
district and provincial levels; they help health workers 
plan for adequate stocking of supplies and result in 
the prevention of vaccine wastage and shortages. 
Abbreviation: NIIS, National Immunization Information System.Figure 3. How Vietnam’s National Immunization Information System works.12
NIIS Technical Working Group:
The NIIS Technical Working Group (TWG) was formed to finalize and maintain the user-
friendliness of the NIIS system, to collaborate on meeting end-user needs with regard to client 
and vaccine-tracking capabilities, and to generate reports for high-level decision-making. The 
TWG is important in order to: 
The TWG is comprised of a critical set of diverse partners that contribute to the sustainability and 
technical implementation of the NIIS in Vietnam:
NEPI : (Immunization Expert) technical lead on business analysis and developer of user 
requirements, reporting systems and reporting mechanism. NEPI asks the question, “what do end 
users need?”
MOH/GDPM : (Health Expert) coordinator of connecting all stakeholders together, administration 
support and the push for provincial implementation and policy change
Viettel : (Technology Expert) system developer and maintainer
PATH : (Liasion and Support Expert) technical support and advisor for all stakeholders, serving 
as the connection between immunizations, general health and technology and the facilitator of  
communication between TWG members.  
TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP DELIVERABLES: 
1. Analyze business and user requirements as needed
2. Develop user manuals
3. Identify the appropriate ways to implement the system in the form of a high-level 
implementation guideline
4. Collect feedback and analyze data for consistent and constant improvement of the 
system1
2
3Maintain communication between 
partners and agencies involved in 
the NIIS
Continue maintenance and upkeep 
of the system 
Collaborate on solving challenges 
and facilitating improvementsFigure 4. Important roles of the NIIS Technical Working Group.Partnering with MNO’s to improve the system in Vietnam13
133.1.  Benefits
A crucial question in the foundation of a partnership with an MNO from a health agency perspective 
is: “What assets are brought to the partnership by MNOs?”1 According to the WHO, these commonly 
include core connectivity, core support infrastructure, and business infrastructure.
In Vietnam, Prof. Tran Dac Phu recognized that the scope of a project such as the NIIS could only 
be accomplished with technology. He said, “Only IT [information technology] can help to track and 
manage people’s immunization history for their whole life, from newborn to 15 years of life and 
then on to death. ”5 
Data for the NIIS is extensive, with 113 million vaccine injections and 1.7 million births in Vietnam 
annually, amounting to 17 million immunization records. In addition to vital vaccinations from 
birth to the age of 15 years, people need vaccinations until old age (e.g., for rabies or influenza). 
This context required the NIIS to be capable of high-capacity data storage, organization, and 
analysis. This meant partnering with an MNO that could meet the need for large data capacity, 
upkeep of organization, and the financing to maintain capacity and allocation of resources.
As explained in section two on the background information on ImmReg, the NIIS requires 
significant capabilities from technology leaders for the technical robustness and maintenance 
of the system. It also requires strong connectivity capabilities for the delivery of SMS 
reminder messages to the large datasets of phone numbers that are registered in the system. 
3. Ministry of Health 
     perspective on partnership  
Definitions of terms 
Core connectivity : Capability of mobile network operator to connect end users 
with each other, the system, or other important stakeholders with voice calling, 
text (SMS), and data applications through their wireless mobile network. 
Core support infrastructure : The infrastructure of the mobile network 
operator that has been developed to serve their customers, including systems 
for billing, and the tracking of usage and quality of service. This can also 
include customer-service relationship capabilities (call center and data center 
infrastructure)
Business infrastructure : Access to marketing capabilities, advertising 
infrastructure, and distribution capabilities.14
 
3.2.  Choosing a Mobile Network Operator: Vietnam 
Understanding motivating benefits can lead to the determination of the best MNO for partnership. In 
Vietnam, Viettel, a state-run organization, has a well-established relationship with the government 
of Vietnam. “Viettel trusts the government, and the government trusts them. When MOH trusts 
PATH, then there is a big circle of trust” , Dr. Vu Minh Huong of PATH.6 The MOH and GDPM have 
confidence in Viettel’s data security; they are certain that Viettel will protect important health data 
in the long term. This serves as motivation for longstanding partnership and continuous project 
development. Beyond this unique partnership trust base in Vietnam, Viettel was able to check the 
boxes of global framework assets introduced above and detailed below:
Core connectivity : Viettel is the largest MNO in Vietnam, with a large network of mobile services 
and an expansive network range into rural areas and hard-to-reach populations. Dr. Huong from 
PATH stated, “One of the biggest advantages is that Viettel has a very wide network down to 
village level. They have access to every village in Vietnam. They have a lot of resources—financial, 
human resources—in every province. ”6 Viettel was able to confront Vietnam’s current spike in 
urbanization. It had the capability to form an effective immunization record system network that 
could track and follow children who move locations, and maintain their records throughout these 
transitions. This not only prevents duplication of vaccinations and cuts down the use of stocks that 
could be used for other children, it also cuts down duplication of records, which leads to increased 
likelihood of errors and poor data quality.
Core support infrastructure : The infrastructure of Viettel is designed for customer service. 
Viettel’s server and mobile network brings internet connectivity to every village. It has the 
capability to provide computers to community health centers that do not yet have the technology 
to implement a digital system. Viettel also has an extensive support network, as they have large 
human resources capacity to support end users in every district nationwide. Additional attributes 
of Viettel that stand out from competitors include their consistent and frequent updates to 
their systems based on groundbreaking new technology, and their prowess for applying this to 
systems rapidly. Based on previous system operations, Viettel proved that they were capable of 
implementing large-scale projects rapidly and had the experience to sufficiently work with and 
maintain big data. As Vietnam sees 1.7 million newborns registered into the system annually, the 
data for this system will only grow as upkeep of the system improves; maintaining this quality is 
an essential attribute.              Ictur, cus duciis a nem laut 
ullatet que occulla velignaturis 
dest, occus aut eos maximi, sitat 
est vit occuptatem faceperum qui 
doloresedi conecto intiur, con If you want to implement a system 
at this scale (NIIS), it is imperative to 
work with a big company like Viettel. 
The MNO [mobile network operator] 
of choice must have a large capacity 
and a large presence in the country, 
be financially secure, and be able to 
provide necessary human resources 
in both quality and quantity. 
Choosing an MNO, it would be best 
to select the largest MNO with the 
longest history of success in the 
country of implementation
- Dr. Dang Thi Thanh Huyen NEPI
PATH/Maya RiveraPartnering with MNOs15
             Business infrastructure:  Viettel has a well-established business and name in Vietnam, as it is the 
largest mobile network provider. It is a popular brand for clients all over the country, and it has the 
capacity to reach and gain clients in very rural districts. Viettel also has a large capacity and a global 
presence, with services in ten countries in addition to Vietnam: Bitel in Peru, Halotel in Tanzania, 
Lumitel in Burundi, Metfone in Cambodia, Movitel in Mozambique, Mytel in Myanmar, Natcom in 
Haiti, Nexttel in Cameroon, Telemor in East Timor, and Unitel in Laos. In addition to supporting 
nonprofit projects and showing commitment to corporate social responsibility (when a company 
takes responsibility for their impact on the communities they serve) such as the NIIS  , they also 
continue successfully as a profit-driven business; they conduct other software development in 
the health insurance and hospital management sectors. Viettel in Tanzania has around 1 million 
customers, which spotlights that, as a business, Viettel is proficient and capable of a vast array of 
projects that differ in both focus areas and business models.
Although these motivating factors for an mHealth service provider to choose the correct MNO 
are relevant to Viettel’s capabilities, Vietnam presents a distinct standpoint on the partnership 
between government (MOH) and an MNO (Viettel): Viettel is a state-run MNO and is technically a 
branch of the government. Thus, it creates a strong foundation of experiences and trust with the 
government, which continues to maintain them as their MNO of choice for multiple projects.
Additional benefits of the Viettel partnership
The partnership between the mobile health (mHealth) service providers—the  
General Department of Preventive Medicine, Ministry of Health, National Expanded 
Programme on Immunization , and PATH—and Viettel has so far proven quite 
successful. Viettel has contributed the framework benefits listed above, as well as 
responded to the requests from the various mHealth service providers. This has 
included facilitating accurate representation of the various partners when needed 
(e.g., putting various logos and names on documents, press releases, and their 
website). This has created a foundation of trust between the partners as a team of 
collaborators for the system, rather than a siloed relationship.
WHO/Mark Leong16
4. MNO perspective on 
partnership 
4.1. Drivers
Motivators for MNOs to partner with mHealth service providers like the MOH, NEPI, GDPM, and 
PATH include improving health in society, health initiatives setting them apart and above other 
MNOs as more invested in the health and well-being of the population,   using their already 
developed information communication technology functionalities, and increasing revenue.1
Viettel is the largest and most established MNO in Vietnam. Although they are a business, they 
are “motivated to allocate their expansive network and resources to causes that benefit society 
and create better health outcomes. ”7 Initially, Viettel was motivated to become involved in the 
health sector when they discovered that they were capable of allocating beneficial resources and 
support to develop information technology (IT) applications that would directly benefit health 
outcomes. Viettel started at the primary health care level when they aimed to become more 
involved in health insurance. 
According to Viettel, the advantages of partnering with the health sector are obvious: It 
synergistically increases the value of the brand name. Also, the NIIS is a model for the national IT 
system; as the forerunner of a national IT system, Viettel anticipates that its involvement with the 
NIIS will lead to Viettel’s growth as an IT expert nationally.
Figure 5.  World Health Organization benefits of partnerships for MNO 
Impact on health 
outcomes 
Competitive 
differentiation
Effective use of 
Viettel-ICT’ s existing 
capabilities yScale of the health  problem 
 yBurden of disease
 yVisibility of the health problem
 yDirectness of the services impact
 yScope for  differentiation 
 yImpact on core operator metrics: market share, sub -
scriber base, customer churn
 yEnhanced consumer brand 
 yA unique value proposition created for the cutomer
 yImproved usage of current operator services
 yImproved returns on exisiting investments 
 yEffectively use and scale-up existing ICT capabilities
World Health Organization. (2015). A practical guide for engaging with mobile network operators in mHealth.Proof points DriverPartnering with MNOs17
Relationship-strengthening and trust-building with the government as the partners move forward 
collaboratively spurs Viettel’s commitment to the system and showcases nationally and globally 
that with the support from Viettel, the NIIS was scaled up to a national-level system, and that any 
IT system developed by Viettel has the proficiency to meet high-level and stringent requirements 
with potential worldwide application.
Content : Viettel initially did not have base knowledge of data flow and end-user requirements 
with regard to the health sector; development of a successful system that would center around 
health worker and client users’ needs required specified PATH and NEPI support. PATH and MOH 
also provided high-level health information knowledge-sharing (such as immunization materials 
and general health system background materials).
Technology : The development of the NIIS required the combined efforts of multiple partners, but 
it stemmed from a successful design by PATH. It was key to share technological information about 
the system and why it would fit the needs of end users, as well as to target the populations that 
needed the system the most.
Implementation experience : The success of the PATH pilot of ImmReg in Ben Tre and PATH’s 
already documented positive relationship with the government provided sound evidence that 
PATH was capable of scaling up and supporting the implementation of high-level health initiatives.
Relationships and credibility : PATH is a global organization that works to accelerate health 
equity by bringing together public institutions, businesses, social enterprises, and investors to 
solve the world’s most pressing health challenges. 
As Viettel continues to work closely with the Vietnamese government, the trust between the 
partners builds, as well as encourages future collaboration and continued selection of Viettel as 
the choice MNO for projects.
Support and funding : Currently, Viettel is supporting MOH and has no plans of handing over the 
NIIS. They would like to stand by the software to continue its upkeep and work toward upgrading 
and expanding to other health areas and sectors. In terms of incentives, even without formal 
payment from mHealth service providers, Viettel’s revenue has the potential to increase based on 
increased brand recognition and the enhanced likelihood of further projects outside of Vietnam. 
Viettel’s commitment when broadcasted on a global scale, highlights the company’s dedication 
to improving health and well-being and their competence in operating a range of projects in 
different areas. 
- Mr. Khong Van Dong 
Viettel Even though Viettel is a for-profit or -
ganization/business, we would like 
to support the Ministry of Health to 
develop applications for the health 
sector and contribute to society.
Benefits to Viettel from mHealth service providers: 
 PATH/Maya Rivera 18
5. Challenges and lessons 
learned: Vietnam 
According to the WHO, there are three main challenges that MNOs commonly face when 
developing a partnership with mHealth service providers; these hurdles were present in the 
Viettel-MOH-PATH partnership1:
1. Long-term versus short-term investment strategies : 
“MNOs generally work with shorter product life cycles than are required by mHealth service 
providers, so investing in long-term research and development is challenging” .1 Viettel was new 
to investing in immunization information systems, especially health projects that were being built 
for scale. Being part of a partnership that was designed for long-term investment and continuous 
upkeep of a national system required adaptation of existing business models, as well as knowledge 
acquisition about communication and exchange strategies between partners.7
2. Financial constraints : 
Although committed to the NIIS beyond financial motivations, Viettel still faces challenges with 
financial aspects of the system, as well as the uncertainty from not having a high-level agreement 
on financial aspects of the project. As of now, they pay for many things, such as research and 
testing of the system, out of pocket.
3. Different business models :
Similar to the challenges seen by mHealth service providers, the MNO Viettel faced a significant 
learning curve when developing the system. As they are not health or immunization experts and 
had little experience with mHealth initiatives, changing from a business and commercial venture 
to a public health collaboration mind-set presented difficulties.
Additionally, partnerships between mHealth service providers and MNOs may prove to be 
challenging, even with an enabling environment and a circle of trust built with the chosen MNO. 
In Vietnam, the mHealth service providers MOH, GDPM, NEPI, and PATH faced complications in the 
partnership with Viettel in several areas outside of the WHO guidelines1:
Security : Although the government has strong confidence in the security of data in the system, 
Viettel’s successful security and sensitivity with internet protocols in support of government 
standards at times prevented PATH from assessing and accessing the system extensively. If we do 
not have access to all the information about the system, then we may not fully be able to support 
or improve the system. If we do not have full access, it is hard for us to fully assist.6
Learning curve and ability to exchange and understand information among partners : 
GDPM, NEPI, and PATH found that initial conversations about the health outcome goals of this project 
were difficult due to a drastic variance of experience with health and immunization terminology. 
Viettel, like many MNOs, is not a health agency and has little experience in immunizations and 
high-level health initiatives. The translation of information from highly technical teams such as 
MOH, GDPM, and NEPI to Viettel in order to paint a clear picture of Viettel’s role, the project, and 
the end goals took time and collaboration. Partnering with MNOs19
Formal agreements : In Vietnam, all of the partners who were involved in the NIIS have actively 
voiced their enthusiasm for the system. They continue to prove their commitment by attending 
TWG meetings and participating in assessments and improvements of the system. This, however, 
is less sustainable than a formal and written agreement signed by all stakeholders. The lack of 
coordination and a formal, signed agreement created a discrepancy in decided and agreed 
outcomes, roles, deliverables, and financial responsibilities. This not only created confusion on both 
sides, but also created delays in coordination and implementation. On reflection, when the project 
was established and plans were made for long-term implementation, a more formal agreement 
between all stakeholders should have been signed. A memorandum of understanding, as an 
official document and collaboration road map, would have been an ideal binding document to 
establish these foundational definitions. After the signing of a formal agreement between parties, 
partners should conduct regular meetings to address if they are meeting signed partnership 
actions, agreements, and conditions, and to update the contract as needed.6
5.1. Takeaway advice after looking back 
In developing a pilot designed for scale, developers of the system should immediately begin 
looking for a strong MNO partnership instead of waiting until the project has matured. Establishing 
a strong partnership will enable MNOs and mHealth service providers to grow together with the 
project and create understanding on both sides, which will reduce learning curves and provide 
real-time experience to perfect the system and synergistically facilitate the expansion of uptake.
In the case of Vietnam, it was very important that the MNO was trusted by the government, because 
the information in the NIIS is incredibly sensitive. To begin the project with a foundation of trust 
with an established MNO with history in the country and a long record of services is evidently 
significant.
Viettel recommends that other MNOs move toward similar projects globally, as this cross-sector 
collaboration is necessary. Partnerships like the one formed in Vietnam secured and built better 
connections between important entities globally who are all focused on the betterment of society.7“Step by step, 
we understood more 
and more of immunization 
health and terminology 
associated with high-level 
health projects” 
 - Mr. Khong Van Dong,
Viettel 20
6.1.  Current focus: partnership goals
The NIIS system is still not perfect. Viettel is committed to increasing data input and facilitating the 
automatic generation of reports for repository. The NIIS system now meets the requirements for 
tracking patients, but it needs to be improved. NEPI will continue working with Viettel to finalize 
the system, with PATH continuing as a technical advisor and GDPM facilitating policy change and 
mobilizing commitment at the provincial level. The system desperately needs to increase its end 
user retention and improve data quality while reducing duplications.
6.2.  Potential projects
The data for the NIIS is very important for NEPI but now that an established TWG is dedicated 
to working together and collaborating, opportunities to expand are becoming more evident. 
Other health areas can benefit from systems like the NIIS now that we have the support and 
the commitment of key stakeholders and the leaders of MOH, PATH, and Viettel. Incorporating 
nutritional data and noncommunicable disease information into the current system will use the 
strengths of the NIIS and sync health data into one platform; this, hopefully, will further improve 
data quality, decrease time spent on data input, and improve health outcomes.
Viettel has its own goals for the future as an MNO and hopes that every Vietnamese will have their 
own access to health electronic records. They are committed to working with the government to 
accomplish their goal to create a health sector that tops charts around the world in making all 
health records electronic. Viettel envisions the creation of an electronic individual identifier for 
each person to track more than just immunizations and include prescriptions, health conditions, 
medical services, administration records, and user-interactive services such as appointment 
scheduling—all integrated into one system. This could potentially branch out and connect with 
the noncommunicable disease–prevention and communicable disease- surveillance sectors.
           
6. Future: Where do we go 
from here? 
         PATH/Maya RiveraPartnering with MNOs21
GDPM has a goal for all newborns to be vaccinated and for 1.7 million individuals to be given 
unique bar codes in the NIIS. The goal is to have a national ID connected to the NIIS and other 
health trackers. First, however, GPDM/MOH would like to finalize the reporting system with the 
NIIS. “First and foremost, we should finalize immunization tracking because that takes priority, and 
then we should expand to NCDs and other health areas” , said Professor Tran Dac Phu . 
GDPM also suggests that PATH, Viettel, and NEPI should continue working together and testing 
new software that would expand the concept of the NIIS to a larger scale, including tracking and 
storing data from various focus areas. Professor Tran Dac Phu stated that “The goal would be for 
all caregivers to be able to access their records, as well as their children’s records all in one system. ” 
NEPI shares the vision of continuing the work of the TWG to move forward with a data tracking 
and monitoring software. The trust and communication that have been formed between the 
TWG for the NIIS took years. Now that it is at its peak and the NIIS meets the requirements for 
tracking patients, and it works well, all partners should use this momentum to finalize the system, 
increase end-user upkeep, increase data, and expand the system to other health focus areas, such 
as nutrition and NCDs.8
Viettel has experienced great expansion since the start of the NIIS. The working relationship between 
PATH and Viettel continues to improve as the partnership and each individual organization builds 
and grows over time. Viettel and PATH anticipate working on more projects together, not only 
in Vietnam, but potentially in other Mekong-region countries (Myanmar and Laos). Metfone in 
Cambodia is run by Viettel; it provides a good gateway to moving internationally with partnership 
projects. “The fact is that as Viettel is expanding and are maintaining a partnership and including 
PATH on ideas, and this is a good indication that the relationship is getting better and stronger” 
explained Dr. Huong.  
 This case study is a valuable lesson that provides food for thought, as well as guidance for others 
considering similar partnerships.
For projects similar to the NIIS, I think that working with 
Viettel is key. This is a great example of a government-run, 
national-scale application worldwide. And opportunities 
to expand this knowledge is great for Viettel and great for 
PATH, as the relationship between the two partners is built 
on Viettel’s commitment to use its resources for good and 
PATH’s fundamental mission to work for public well-being 
and health. Both require little in requests from each other, 
and both are more than willing to put time, energy, and 
resources into the betterment of societies.
- Dr. Huong PATH22Endnotes
1 World Health Organization. (2015). A practical guide for engaging with mobile network  
operators in mHealth for reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health. Switzerland:   
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data. 
2 United Nations Foundation, PATH, HRP (United Nations Development Programme, United  
Nations Population Fund/United Nations Children’s Fund/World Health Organization/World Bank 
Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction). 
PATH Vietnam and ImmReg: Expanding Reach of the Immunization Registry in Vietnam. Seattle: 
PATH; 2016. https://path.azureedge.net/media/documents/ID_vietnam_unf_cs.pdf.
3 Anh Tú T. Opportunities and obstacles for digital technology in Vietnam’s public health 
systems [blog post]. Innovative Support to Emergencies, Diseases, and Disasters (InSTEDD) Blog. 
February 23, 2018. https://instedd.org/blog/opportunities-and-obstacles-for-digital-technolo -
gy-in-vietnams-public-health-systems.
4 Pham L. How digitalization transforms Vietnam? Hanoi Times. Updated on March 25, 2019. 
http://www.hanoitimes.vn/economy/2019/03/81e0d4c1/how-digitalization-transforms-viet -
nam/.
5 Professor Tran Dac Phu (director general, General Department of Preventive Medicine,   
Ministry of Health of Vietnam); in-person interview; May 23, 2019; Hanoi, Vietnam. 
6 Dr. Vu Minh Huong (Asia Region Technical Advisor, PATH); in-person interview; May 13, 
2019; Hanoi, Vietnam. 
7 Dr. Khong Van Dong (Viettel); in-person interview; April 17, 2019; Hanoi, Vietnam.
8 Dr. Dang Thi Thanh Huyen. “Interview with NEPI. ” In-person interview. 26 April 2019. Partnering with MNOs23
