https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877919842575International Journal of Cultural Studies 
 1 –19
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:  
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1367877919842575
journals.sagepub.com/home/ics
The digital carceral: Media 
infrastructure, digital cultures and state surveillance in post-Arab Spring Morocco
Annemarie Iddins
Fairfield University, USA
Abstract
This paper analyzes Moroccan discourses around media infrastructures and their intersection 
with carceral culture, taking up Mamfakinch’s responses to state-sponsored spyware attacks and judicial harassment as symbolic of shifting imaginaries of the digital. This work is situated within 
a growing subset of the media and communication literature on media infrastructures, which 
works to connect the materiality of media systems with everyday media cultures, practices and power. Mamfakinch’s experience with spyware and subsequent evolution into a digital rights organization are indicative of attempts to transfer a lingering carceral culture into digital spaces 
and a shift in state and activist internet imaginaries. In a global era and as part of a hypersurveillant 
state, Mamfakinch demonstrates how the digital becomes an increasingly important site for the surveillance and policing of dissent while presenting new modes of publicness and activism that directly challenge those endeavors.
Keywords
activism, carceral culture, digital culture, global media, media infrastructure, Morocco, surveillance
In July 2012 a spyware attack targeted the activist blogging collective Mamfakinch, 
which had emerged out of the Arab Spring moment in Morocco as a key site for circulat-ing information about protests and larger social change in Morocco. The site’s editorial team received an email suggesting it would reveal a major scandal, but which turned out to be bait for the installation of spyware on the collective’s personal devices. Earlier the site had been subject to DDoS (distributed denial of service) attacks that made it difficult 
Corresponding author:
Annemarie Iddins, PhD, Fairfield University, 1073 North Benson Road, Fairfield, CT 06824, USA. Email: aiddins@fairfield.edu842575 ICS0010.1177/1367877919842575International Journal of Cultural StudiesIddins
research-article 2019
Special Issue: Arab Media
2 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
to access, but the spyware signified a new level of surveillance and significant invest-
ment in monitoring activists.
Mamfakinch, meaning ‘no concessions’ in Moroccan Arabic, emerged out of the 
February 20th movement in Morocco and its preparations for initial protests on that date. In the midst of a media blackout and misinformation about the nascent movement, Mamfakinch became a site to aggregate and share information about Arab Spring protests in Morocco. Operated by a collective of activists, bloggers and journalists in Morocco and the diaspora, the site operated on the logic of continuous circulation of content, often acting as an intermediary among the February 20th movement, Moroccan publics, local media, global media, transnational activist networks and international observers. Translating con-tent across Arabic, French and English Mamfakinch brought together diverse publics around discussions about political and social change in Morocco during the Arab Spring and its aftermath. In some ways Mamfakinch came to act as a sort of networked activist infrastructure, or a set of people, practices and platforms that could be mobilized in moments of contention For a more detailed analysis of Mafakinch, see Iddins, 2018).
Mamfakinch sent the spyware from the 2012 attack to Citizen Lab
1 at the University 
of Toronto, which identified it as ‘a variant of a commercial backdoor sold by the Italian company “Hacking Team”’ in an October 2012 report (Marquis-Boire, 2012). Hacking Team claims only to sell its technologies to ‘worldwide law enforcement and intelligence communities’, billing itself as ‘The Hacking Suite for Governmental Interception’ (Hacking Team, 2016). Hacking Team’s spyware is both technologically sophisticated and expensive, meaning that cost would make it prohibitive to most individuals.
2 Hacking 
Team’s Remote Control System software allowed for remote access to and tracking of infected devices, logging emails, passwords, social media accounts, webcams and more (Gallagher, 2012). As part of a global information economy, surveillance technologies have become a multi-billion dollar a year commercial industry,
3 raising concerns about 
larger historical trends of solidarity among carceral states – including Western democra-cies – and their industry partners in building repressive logics into everyday media infrastructures.
Media infrastructure and the carceral
This paper analyzes Moroccan discourses around media infrastructures and their inter -
section with carceral culture, taking up Mamfakinch’s responses to state-sponsored spy-ware attacks and judicial harassment as symbolic of shifting imaginaries of the digital. This work is situated within a growing subset of media and communication literature on media infrastructures, which works to connect the materiality of media systems with everyday media cultures, practices and power (Aouragh and Chakravartty, 2016; Graham and Marvin, 2001; Larkin, 2008; Parks and Starosielski, 2015; Plantin et al., 2016; Punathambekar and Mohan, 2018; Sandvig, 2013). Using the technological affordances of the digital, Mamfakinch was a response to a media system restrained by red lines, economic imperatives and an insufficient online presence. Mamfakinch’s experience with spyware and subsequent evolution into a digital rights organization are indicative of attempts to transfer a lingering carceral culture into digital spaces and recognition of the limitations of utopian internet imaginaries. Mamfakinch demonstrates how the digital, in Iddins 3
a global era and as part of a hypersurveillant state, becomes an increasingly important 
site for the surveillance and policing of dissent while presenting new modes of public-ness and activism that challenge those endeavors.
Through Mamfakinch this article connects longer histories of carceral culture with 
media infrastructure and digital cultures in Morocco. Fundamentally it argues that Mamfakinch’s transformation into a digital rights association represents a shift in imagi-nations tied to the transfer of carceral culture and logics into the digital realm, and the ways in which the democratic promises and potential of media infrastructures declined as a result of greater awareness of its popular political potential. Mamfakinch constitutes a transitional moment in the Moroccan media landscape in which divergent imaginaries of the digital by the state and civil society came into sharp relief. Similar to many Global South states, the Moroccan state imagined telecommunications and the digital as the key to economic growth and prosperity as part of the global knowledge economy while approaching public use as a steam valve rather than a credible threat to the status quo. Meanwhile, the digital became a refuge for independent journalists at a time immediately preceding the Arab Spring when independent media in Morocco were largely in recoil as a result of judicial harassment and economic censorship. For these journalists, and for civil society more broadly, imaginaries of the internet as a radically democratic and unregulated space beyond the gatekeeping power of the state were central at a time when media infrastructures were emergent and access rapidly expanding.
The prevalence of utopian narratives of technological determinism during and in the 
immediate aftermath of Arab Spring uprisings necessitates reconsidering through a lens of continuity rather than rupture. If many scholars have focused on the exceptionalism or particular dynamics of the Arab Spring moment, fewer have attempted to historicize that moment. In looking at the Arab Spring and its aftermath through the lens of continuity rather than narratives of democratization and change, a very different picture emerges of this moment’s enduring legacy. This is not to negate the important interventions and significant changes produced by Arab Spring protesters and popular democracy move-ments, but rather to highlight the moment’s significance in setting in place repressive approaches to digital culture that include a backlash aimed at reining in online political culture which has received relatively little scholarly attention. Many key dynamics emerging from that moment remain unexplored, including investments in surveillance technologies and press code reforms that attempt to transfer restrictions on legacy media into the digital realm. With this in mind, I work to historicize and connect carceral and digital cultures in Morocco, placing them in relation to broader media infrastructure, ask-ing how imaginations of media infrastructures have shifted over time and what role broader histories of carceral culture play in shaping current conceptions of digital rights? Methodologically, this work is based in a discourse analysis of digital development that took on two dimensions: state discourse and civil society discourse. For the state, I looked at public discourse from authorities, development plans, loan applications and regulatory reports in order to construct a genealogy of the digital in its early days. For civil society, I analyzed discourse from local and global non-governmental organizations (NGOs), activists and media around the same genealogy and its potential and pitfalls for their purposes, including an interview with Mamfakinch co-founder and spokesman Hisham Almiraat.4 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
The changes described above are particularly significant in semi-authoritarian socie-
ties, where government accountability is reduced by lack of real competition for power 
(Ottaway, 2003). In media studies, much attention is given to extreme authoritarianism in media–state relations – cases like China’s ‘great firewall’ or Egypt’s internet shutdown in 2011. In comparison to dynamics elsewhere in the region, Morocco was applauded for taking a hands-off approach to protesters and online spaces after violence in Tunisia and Egypt captured global attention. This article attempts to make sense of the subtle, insidious nature of semi-authoritarianism online constituted by strategic forms of repres-sion and their institutionalization. How do we explain a moment when a monarchy is applauded for ostensibly prohibiting police from physically harming protesters and allowing critical speech, yet carries on reinscribing its power above the political system, investing in increased surveillance of dissidents and constructing bureaucratic barriers to their on- and offline operations through more mundane tools of governance like regula-tion and the courts? This frequently pairs with strategic repression out of the public eye, when global attention has waned, and in geographically and economically marginalized areas. At the same time, collaborative projects like Mamfakinch are indicative of the extent to which peer production of knowledge and information is expanding the array of relevant actors, realms of collaboration and opportunities to learn from and work with other initiatives – all associated with more democratic understandings of culture and a plane of politics that extends beyond the nation. These contradictions come into sharper focus in the longer term aftermath of the Arab Spring.
Surveillance
The Oxford English Dictionary defines surveillance as the ‘close observation, especially 
of a suspected spy or criminal’, From the French sur (over) and veiller (to watch), the 
term implies top-down watching (sur) from a position of power and carries a negative connotation generally reserved for criminals, spies and terrorists. And yet surveillance has been used to describe increasingly banal forms of data collection and watching that characterize everyday life activities in a hypermediated age. In doing so it carries into the realm of everyday life connotations of assumed suspicion for any who question the implications for privacy rights or civil liberties, with the hegemonic refrain: ‘What do you have to hide?’ From a Foucauldian perspective, surveillance is a means of enacting power, instrumental in disciplining and domination (Foucault, 1977). Scholars of the expansive (and expanding) scope of surveillance in the digital era follow similar defini-tions based around the collection of information for purposes of order, classification and control (Fuchs, 2011; Lyon, 2015; etc.).
The control inherent in surveillance directly correlates with the carceral nature of a 
society. In his work on the origins of modern incarceration, Foucault (1977: 299) invokes ‘the “carceral” with its many diffuse or compact forms, its institutions of supervision or constraint, of discreet surveillance and insistent coercion’. In other words, power is dif-fuse, operating on a continuum of external and internalized discipline and constraints. It is difficult to read this description of the carceral or Foucault’s analysis of Bentham’s panopticon without evoking similarities to contemporary forms of digital surveillance and social control. For my purposes, what Foucault fails to do is locate the power through Iddins 5
which the carceral operates, particularly in relation to institutions. To the question ‘who 
is doing what and how does it come about?’ Foucault provides few answers. In this case, media infrastructure provides a means to locate power by connecting materiality with digital cultures and imaginaries.
I take an expansive view of infrastructure that follows Larkin’s (2008: 6) definition as 
the ‘totality of both technical and cultural systems that create institutionalized structures whereby goods of all sorts circulate’. Including both material systems and the platforms and practices that configure their use (often referred to as ‘soft’ infrastructure) allows for greater elucidation of the way the material and cultural components are layered onto media objects and our imaginaries about them in ways that are often difficult to deline-ate. While defining media infrastructure as ‘situated sociotechnical systems’, Parks and Starosielski (2015: 4–5) point to the ways media infrastructures are both materially and discursively constructed. It is impossible to separate imaginations about who and what connectivity is for from the way those infrastructures are constructed and implemented. Clearly in capital-intensive infrastructure construction the state is a locus of power; how-ever Mamfakinch also makes clear that users – and activists in particular – layer plat-forms and practices onto systems of wires and cables that allow them to work within broader political economic structures to reimagine who and what media infrastructures are for. Generally, infrastructure operating properly is defined by its invisibility (Parks and Starosielski, 2015: 6). But there is another level of visibility linked to media infra-structures, and that is the ability to make visible the everyday lives of people as they interact with this increasingly essential mediated world, dependent on devices, wires, towers and signals. The transformation of bodies into mobile sites of data and metadata production by media infrastructure represent an intensification of the body as a site for the production of data, building on colonial logics of quantification and categorization as described in Anderson’s (1983) work on the census. Recent work on surveillance capital-ism (Zuboff, 2019) indicates the extent to which surveillance is becoming the bedrock of information economies, implicating the neoliberal state in the process.
Approaching mediated activism and surveillance from the perspective of media infra-
structure constitutes a refusal to fetishize bodily emancipation and an insistence on mak-ing visible the logics, practices, materialities and bodies of carceral states, of situating them in local, historical context rather than obscuring the institutions, platforms and practices that make surveillance of activist bodies banal. Media infrastructures offer affordances for activist anonymity, solidarity and action at a distance that shouldn’t be discounted, but neither should we discount their affordances for solidarity among car -
ceral states as part of a neoliberal world order. Fundamentally, activists are increasingly visible while the conditions of watching are increasingly obscured, both by distance and increasingly complex, highly specialized technological systems. The uncertainty inscribed in this dynamic – in terms of who is watching and when and what type of reper -
cussions result – can ultimately be paralyzing for a networked public sphere.
Moroccan carceral culture
Modern Morocco has a long history of carceral culture, particularly related to politi-cal dissidents. Much of the 38-year reign of Hassan II became known as the Years of 6 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
Lead, which is generally characterized as beginning with the state of exception in 
1965 when the king assumed all legislative and executive powers, and ending with a wave of amnesties in the early 1990s. During this time, police surveillance, sudden disappearances and secret prisons gave rise to widespread fear and paranoia as part of Moroccan public culture, a genre of Moroccan literature referred to as la littéra-ture carcérale (carceral literature) and Morocco’s abysmal human rights record among the international community. Several sites came to occupy an infamous place in carceral literature and public memory: Dar el-Mokri, the Rabat residence used to torture dissidents; Derb Moulay Cherif, known as Casablanca’s ‘house of torture’; Kenitra Central Prison, where many political prisoners were held long-term; and finally, Tazmamart, the secret military prison on the edge of the Sahara where some of the regime’s most threatening challengers were ‘disappeared’. Communications about this period largely emerged only after Mohammed VI succeeded his father in 1999, with his transition to power coming at a time of economic liberalization and cultural globalization that led the state to take a (more) hands-off approach to media and new communication technologies. The late 1990s and early 2000s saw a wealth of testimonies from former prisoners and accounts written in prison finally being published and available to the public in Morocco.
4 The lingering importance of this 
era is evident in the reworking of these memories in post-Arab Spring popular cul-ture through such films as Hicham Lasri’s C’est eux les chiens (2013), Abdelkader 
Lagtaa’s La Moitié du ciel (2015) and Mohamed Mouftakir’s L’Orchestre des aveu-
gles (2015).
An emergent civil society inscribed human rights in Moroccan public discourse as a 
central issue for the left. This had strong implications for a group of independent news magazines that emerged during the Alternance era
5 (Le Journal, Demain, Telquel) as 
platforms for and participants in this public discourse. Slyomovics (2005) argues that Morocco’s human rights movement, largely built on the testimonials of former prisoners, was both a result of and instrumental in making the unspeakable realities of torture speakable and part of Moroccan discourse. The human rights movement used media as its mechanism for publicizing torture, disappearances and imprisonment. According to Waltz (1995: 224): ‘Most Moroccans who learned of the release of Tazmamart prisoners in 1991, for example, received the news via Paris contacts and the French press’, with the Moroccan press often refusing to carry communiqués from human rights groups. Under Mohammed VI, the new independent news magazines became the province of a new, more liberal generation of the secular left that closely covered activities of Moroccan human rights groups. In 2001, Le Journal, in collaboration with Le Monde, published a two-part series based on revelations of former secret agent Ahmed Boukhari about the 1965 disappearance/murder of leftist opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka in Paris, includ-ing allegations of French and American complicity (Smith et al., 2001a, 2001b).
6 
Independent media adopted a try-and-see ethos, testing the boundaries of speech under Mohammed VI, entering into a dynamic of media–state maneuvering dependent on com-plementary or contradictory aims at any given moment. Progressively it became clear that Mohammed VI’s policies served as a continuum of similarly repressive governance through different mechanisms. After Casablanca’s 16 May 2003 suicide bombings,
7 anti-
terrorism legislation became one such mechanism and economic censorship another, Iddins 7
leading journalists and civil society networks to take advantage of relatively unrestricted 
online spaces associated with emergent media infrastructure.
Digital infrastructures and imaginaries
In the 1980s and 1990s, telecommunications were at the vanguard of liberalization in Morocco and indicative of a broader trajectory of neoliberal market reforms. The Moroccan state was an early advocate of the strategic importance of telecommunica-tions, and its turn-of-the-century regulatory framework and liberalization policies were lauded as an example for the Global South, as well as a reason Morocco managed to rank with countries with far more resources in terms of telecom penetration and usage.
8 The 
major regulatory shift associated with law 24-96 and its aims to liberalize and privatize the Moroccan telecommunications sector in 1998 was preceded by several state initia-tives to modernize and expand telecommunications, beginning in 1987 with a US$125 mil-
lion loan from the World Bank (World Bank, 1995: 5) and followed by a 1993–7 project receiving UA743.56 million
9 from various donors, including the African Development 
Bank (ADB, 1999). After law 24-96, a five-year plan was established promulgating ICT (information and communication technology) development as national priority (Morocco, 2007). In his 1997 Throne Speech, King Hassan II discussed telecommunications pri-vatization being imperative because the sector’s investment needs went beyond the means of the state, saying: ‘In the field of communications, a reform of the institutional framework governing this sector is inevitable due to demands from the increased liber -
alization of the world economy on the one hand and rapid technological developments on the other’ (El Kabsi, 2003: 62). For the Moroccan state, telecommunications was seen as a profitable industry in and of itself that the country was uniquely positioned to benefit from, but also a tool for economic development and access to other industries associated with the global knowledge economy.
In 2001, telecommunications accounted for 4% of Morocco’s gross domestic product 
and between 1998 and 2001 the sector accounted for 66% of foreign investment in the country (ANRT, 2001). The government adopted several successive strategies to capital-ize on this growth. A national strategy under the name ‘E- Morocco’ was adopted in 2001, focusing on closing the digital divide and positioning Morocco as a key ICT player globally. According to a 2007 plan update, Morocco’s emphasis on ICTs is based on the industry’s ‘crucial role in the effort undertaken to elaborate and materialize a specific model of sustainable social and economic development for Morocco’ and cites Mohammed VI as saying: ‘This is because we strive to ensure for our great people a global and integrated development, allowing Morocco to occupy the position that it deserves in a world transformed by the digital revolution underway’(Morocco, 2007: 9). Subsequent plan updates, such as Digital Morocco 2013, shift to an external focus, with increased emphasis on offshoring, export of information technology services and estab-lishment of Morocco as a regional telecommunications hub.
At the same time, logics of surveillance and control were being built into emergent 
media infrastructures. Despite privatization, the state has maintained a key 30% stake in dominant telecommunications provider Maroc Telecom, which owns the internet back-bone, requiring other providers to lease access through Maroc Telecom or other public 8 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
entities controlled by the state. Maroc Telecom’s investments in two new fiber optic 
submarine cables since 2007 creates a similar centralizing effect for international con-nectivity, increasing filtering and surveillance capabilities.
10 At a time when people’s 
communities and concerns are less likely to be local, they are often reliant on media infrastructure to communicate at a distance and should be able to expect privacy and access to anonymizers. As early as 1999, Human Rights Watch (HRW) acknowledged privacy online to be fundamental to extending freedom of expression into a global era. ‘By guaranteeing privacy of communications and authenticating the identity of commu-nicators, encryption also enables free association between individuals in cyberspace, an important extension of a traditional right in the new circumstances of globalization’ (HRW, 1999: 10). The resources and power of governments and corporations often mean that they are able to use these infrastructures to advance their own interests in ways that do not necessarily align with the rights of individual users and are increasingly invisible to those users, as demonstrated by Edward Snowden’s 2013 revelations about American citizens being swept up in the National Security Agency’s (NSA’s) expansive surveil-lance net. A 2003 Privacy International and GreenNet Educational Trust report warns about the widespread use of anti-terror legislation to crack down on civil rights in a post-9/11 world, pointing out:
Governments of developing nations rely on Western countries to supply them with the necessary 
technologies of surveillance and control, such as digital wiretapping equipment, deciphering equipment, scanners, bugs, tracking equipment and computer intercept systems. The transfer of 
surveillance technology from first to third world is now a lucrative sideline for the arms 
industry. Without the aid of this technology transfer, it is unlikely that non-democratic regimes could impose the current levels of control over Internet activity. (Privacy International and GreenNet Educational Trust, 2003: 7)
This includes not just technology transfer, but practices and policies that allow states and 
corporations high degrees of discretion in the application of these capabilities. As the internet’s affordances for openness and connectivity challenged the gatekeeping power of the state, Morocco has imposed few restrictions compared to regional neighbors and yet it has invested heavily in surveillance systems and made high-profile examples out of prosecuting uses of media infrastructure that challenge official discourse. For example, in 2011 French newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné (Canard, 2011) and cyber-surveillance monitoring site Reflets published invoices showing that Morocco had invested more than US$2 million in computers and hard drives associated with a surveillance system named Eagle sold by the company Bull through its subsidiary Amesys (Reflets, 2011). Eagle allows for Deep Packet Inspection (DPI), which allows for the detailed inspection and filtering of data packets as they pass through cables and switching stations.
11 Further, it 
is telling that in a 2009–10 case, bloggers who publicized student protests in the south of the country were prosecuted, but it was the owner of the cyber cafe they posted from that received the harshest sentence.
12 Such a prosecution indicates both active surveillance of 
protest movements and that providing access to infrastructure for purposes that contra-dict state discourse and imaginaries is punishable, effectively distributing policing responsibilities throughout that infrastructure.Iddins 9
After the Arab Spring: from Mamfakinch to ADN
Mamfakinch ceased publication in February 2014, and one of the reasons cited for its 
discontinuation was a backlash from authorities that threatened the anonymity on which many of the site’s members depended. According to Almiraat, the Hacking Team spy-ware attack discouraged members until the decrease in the number of participants made the project simply unsustainable (Almiraat, personal communication, 8 May 2015). Several members of Mamfakinch subsequently organized the Digital Rights Association (Association des Droits Numériques – ADN), an NGO dedicated to establishing and protecting rights such as freedom of expression online, access to digital technologies, protection of personal data and participative governance of the internet, among others. However, ADN was not allowed to register as an NGO, meaning the association lacked government approval and was de facto illegal. In its Facebook profile, the organization outlined its mission to:
raise awareness, promote and undertake research on digital rights; Defend human rights in the 
digital space; Advocate, mobilize and foster the convergence of stakeholder initiatives – government, private sector, civil society, the media; Constitute a force of proposal in terms of 
Internet governance. (ADN, 2014a)
In September 2014 ADN released a communiqué on Facebook decrying intimidation 
from authorities that caused a Rabat hotel to decline to host a joint workshop of the Association Marocaine des Droits de l’Homme (AMDH – Moroccan Association for Human Rights) and Privacy International that was to end with a press conference announcing ADN’s formation (ADN, 2014b). The workshop, ‘Freedom of expression and human rights in the digital age’, took place at AMDH headquarters, but ADN’s com-muniqué issues a warning that the organization has sought legal counsel and reminds authorities of existing legal protections for freedom of assembly.
ADN hosted its first ‘Rencontres Raqmiya’ (Digital Meetings) on 13–14 December 
2014, in Rabat, under the theme ‘Internet: Between private life and freedom of expres-sion’. As with the earlier workshop, authorities blocked the scheduled venue, but the conference took place elsewhere, with many former Mamfakinch bloggers attending. Several months later, in February 2015, an ADN communiqué indicated that police raided their headquarters, to which the association responded by denouncing:
this new violation of civil liberties, a new episode in a black series of systematic attacks carried 
out by the State since the summer of 2014 against human rights associations and for which our association has also paid the price. (ADN, 2015)
Amid this generalized campaign of dissuasion, ADN continued its campaigns to educate 
and mobilize publics in opposition to reforms of the penal and press codes that increased legal provisions aimed at cracking down on digital dissent in a post-Arab Spring environment.
ADN collaborated with activists at Privacy International to produce a report titled 
Their Eyes on Me: Stories of Surveillance in Morocco, which aims to give names and 10 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
faces to the often invisible targets of cyber-surveillance (Privacy International, 2015). 
Four Moroccans, including three former Mamfakinch contributors, participated in the report: Hisham Almiraat, Samia Errazzouki, Yassir Kazar and independent journalist Ali Anouzla. The report highlights increasing threats to privacy, freedom of association and freedom of speech online in the aftermath of the Arab Spring, especially for activists associated with the February 20th movement, highlighting threats posed by government investments in surveillance technologies and nationalist hacking groups. The report makes clear that Moroccan authorities combined cyber-surveillance with more tradi-tional means of intimidation, such as phone tapping and police questioning. ‘State agents’ visited the family of one Mamfakinch blogger located abroad multiple times, an act she described as ‘not [about having] answers or information. It is just to intimidate me so I can get the message. It is just about “We want you to know that we’re watching you, not just online but in person”’ (Privacy International, 2015: 25). These accounts are indica-tive of the ways in which media infrastructure has offered new means of intimidation and enabled transfer of restrictions on legacy media into the digital realm.
While the internet had been heralded as a new terrain for liberty in Morocco, govern-
ment use of surveillance technologies and post-Arab Spring crackdowns on dissidents meant that for Almiraat ‘they have turned the internet into something dangerous for those who want to take part in the public debate but have something to lose’ (Privacy International, 2015: 20). This chilling effect was especially potent for those who were not well-versed in digital technologies to begin with. According to Mamfakinch con-tributor Yassir Kazar, people react differently to the trauma of having their privacy invaded. ‘Some people manage to transcend it and to turn into a positive experience and others remain traumatised, especially if technology was not their cup of tea in the first place’ (Privacy International, 2015: 30). For Kazar, the experience was an affirming one in that the government felt sufficiently threatened by Mamfakinch to put significant effort into its surveillance and intimidation.
I spoke with Almiraat a few days after the press conference meant to be the official 
release of the Privacy International report in Morocco. ‘Very early in the morning there were four police vans blocking access to the venue’, he said, ‘and ADN is not the only one [experiencing this]’ (Almiraat, personal communication, 8 May 2015). For Almiraat, there is a general feeling that civil society has become the environment where ideas and like-minded people can come together to build alternative views of the future, a situation that makes it threatening to the status quo. And the authorities don’t have to do much to instill fear in people. ‘We still have memories of 70s/80s/early 90s’, said Almiraat ‘so it’s not a big leap’ (Almiraat, personal communication, 8 May 2015). In many ways, ADN is a response to a paradigm shift coming out of the Arab Spring in regard to official atti-tudes toward the internet, but also activist attitudes. The democratic utopian vision of the internet as a tool capable of confronting authoritarianism gave way to an emphasis on building institutional frameworks to support more traditional forms of political struggle, as seen in the heavy involvement of AMDH and more traditional civil society organiza-tions in ADN efforts. According to Almiraat ‘There was this realization that the internet is not enough’ (Almiraat, personal communication, 8 May 2015).
ADN substitutes depth for the breadth of a collective like Mamfakinch that was more 
oriented toward public engagement than institution building. But getting publics to see Iddins 11
the pressing nature of privacy policies and regulatory frameworks is a more difficult task 
than harnessing the energy of a popular movement. The Privacy International report intended to put a human face on that struggle, and was meant to be the first in a series of three reports produced in collaboration with ADN. ‘It’s hard to make people realize that privacy doesn’t only concern people who have something to hide,’ said Almiraat, ‘People don’t see the direct link between privacy and freedom of expression.’ Almiraat says ADN targets law students and young technologists who are familiar with things like WikiLeaks and the NSA. ‘In that way we’re elitist or selective and even then it’s a hard sell’, he said, ‘but journalists seem to understand that privacy is fundamentally linked to freedom of access and freedom of expression.’ While Mamfakinch opened up conversations that had been happening in private to broader publics, ADN brings targeted conversations to spe-cific publics. In many ways these publics are the ones that were brought to the fore by the Arab Spring moment. At a time when few Moroccan news organizations had a signifi-cant online presence and electronic journalism was in its infancy, Mamfakinch found its niche in curating online information, mobilizing around human rights and privileging citizen voices, especially those associated with civil society and the independent press. For Almiraat, Mamfakinch’s legacy as part of that moment is wrapped up in its combina-tion of on- and offline efforts, and of using technology to pursue public conversations about topics and issues that are off limits in mainstream media.
It was the epitome of what the internet can do best, that is bring together like-minded people to 
work together regardless of distance or geography. In 3–6 months, we had something like a million unique visitors, which shows that people want to talk about sex, religion, the monarchy. 
Mamfakinch showed that the internet can achieve some sort of change and be a motor in some 
circles, provided that people also organize and do things offline. (Almiraat, personal 
communication, 8 May 2015)
Judicial harassment
On 9 May 2015, Morocco’s official state news agency, MAP, published a short news bul-
letin under the title ‘Accused of digital espionage, the Interior files complaint’ (MAP, 2015). Barely two paragraphs, the bulletin states that the Interior Minister filed a lawsuit with the public prosecutor’s office against ‘certain persons who have prepared and dis-tributed a report containing serious accusations’ of espionage by its services, citing an unnamed source from the Ministry of the Interior (MAP, 2015). MAP gives no names, but the news bulletin appeared three days after Privacy International and ADN presented their cyber-surveillance report. Almiraat apparently learned about the lawsuit indirectly as he told Reuters: ‘We suppose they are talking about us’ (El Yaakoubi, 2015). A state-ment from Privacy International confirms: ‘Since the MAP dispatch, the Ministry of Interior has not disclosed further information. Neither Privacy International nor our local Moroccan partner – the Association des Droits Numériques (ADN) – has been contacted by the Moroccan government’ (Privacy International, 2015). While the report didn’t reveal anything that hadn’t been circulating on the internet for years in regard to the Moroccan government’s purchases of spyware or intimidation of journalists and activ-ists, publicizing those allegations in conjunction with international partners and in offline forums in Morocco was apparently a step too far.12 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
Almiraat’s odyssey with lawsuits and court cases was just beginning. In September 
Almiraat and Karima Nadir (ADN VP) were interrogated by the Moroccan Judicial 
Police (BNPJ) in conjunction with the defamation suit filed by the Ministry of the Interior (Alami, 2015; FIDH, 2015). Besides the initial defamation charges associated with the Privacy International report, Almiraat was also charged in conjunction with six other journalists and human rights activists: historian and journalist Maati Monjib, journalists Hicham Mansouri, Abdessamad Iyach/Iach, Maria Moukrim, and Rashid Tarik, plus Mohamed Saber/Essabr president of the Moroccan Association of Youth Education (Association Marocaine pour l’Education de la Jeunesse – AMEJ). The five journalists were affiliated with the Association Marocaine du Journalism d’Investigation (AMJI – the Moroccan Association of Investigative Journalism) and all seven had worked with Dutch NGO Free Press Unlimited on training Moroccans to use the open-source smart-phone app StoryMaker, which allows for producing and publishing media from Android devices. Their work earned Almiraat, Monjib, Mansouri, Iyach and Saber accusations of ‘threatening the internal security of the state’, while Moukrim and Tarik were charged with accepting foreign funding without notifying the government (CIHRS, 2015). The charges carry maximum penalties of five years in prison and hefty fines. The trial, ini-tially set for 19 November 2015, has been postponed ten times over almost three years (FPU, 2016). The charges and ongoing trial indicate use of surveillance and subsequent judicial harassment as part of a broader strategy of digital enclosure being used to con-strain networked publics and their political potential.
The digital carceral
In 2015 Hacking Team itself got hacked, with the hacker tweeting from the company’s account ‘Since we have nothing to hide, we’re publishing all our e-mails, files and source code’, and linking to 400GB of company data (Ghattas, 2015). Leaked files showed that after Mexico and Italy, Morocco was the third highest revenue source, spending more than US$3 million in recent years (Gallagher, 2015).
13 A presentation prepared for a 
surveillance conference references regulations, activists (specifically Citizen Lab, HRW, Privacy International and Anonymous) and the Wassenaar Agreement as having a ‘chill-ing effect’ on the use of technology to fight crime (Gallagher, 2015). Internal emails revealed in the hack show a disregard for concerns about human rights abuses, with one Financial Times article titled ‘Spectre of ISIS used to erode rights in Morocco’ circulated by Vincenzetti with [NOT REALLY] added to the email subject line. Vincenzetti’s email states:
The ISIS menace looms on Moroccan horizon. The King of Morocco is a benevolent monarch, 
he never overcame any Moroccan Parliament decision, he is very different from his father, Morocco is actually the most pro-western Arab country, national security initiatives are solely 
needed in order to tighten stability and defend the country from extremists. Casablanca has 
been bombed by extreme Islamist a few years ago, FYI. (Currier and Marquis-Boire, 2015)
We see here Mohammed VI constructed in opposition to his authoritarian father and 
cooperation with Western interests superseding domestic repression. For Mamfakinch Iddins 13
the hack was accompanied by a sense of vindication as one contributor tweeted ‘There 
you go. The Makhzen actually used surveillance tools from Hacking Team against citi-zens’, linking to analysis from The Intercept (Belmkaddem, 2015).
Surveillance technologies and their international trade are not new. Use of Hacking 
Team spyware against Mamfakinch is merely a recent manifestation of longer histories of solidarity among carceral states, whereby collaboration between repressive state appa-ratuses fulfill a variety of interests and aims. Allegations of CIA training and assistance for secret police and security forces in Morocco and other Global South countries during the Cold War were followed with formal military assistance programs that included tools for domestic use (Klare, 1979), as well as sales from industries supported and enabled by governments. While sales to the most egregiously authoritarian regimes are widely decried, their use by semi-authoritarian regimes raises questions about a willingness to overlook their use against activists and dissidents in favor of broader strategic interests and provides a model for enacting repression without eliciting the ire of the international community. Morocco continues to be a Hacking Team client, a state of affairs the com-pany justifies by the government’s cooperation in the global war on terror.
Vincenzetti says his company lawfully engaged with a government that, he notes in an email, 
‘is an ally of the U.S. and a partner in the fight against terrorism. Morocco is also an ally of most European nations, and Moroccan intelligence agencies recently provided France with 
essential information to locate the terrorists in Paris and in Bruxelles.’ (Kushner, 2016)
The U.S. State Department reports that Morocco has indeed participated in counterter -
rorism efforts with international partners and dismantled domestic cells (U.S. Department 
of State, 2018). Yet the state’s discretionary application of increasingly diffuse and per -
vasive surveillance capabilities elides distinctions between violent extremism and disa-greement with authorities. In 2016 internal documents from New Zealand-based surveillance company Endace revealed Morocco’s domestic intelligence agency, the DGST, to be among its clients (Gallagher and Hager, 2016). According to Amnesty’s North Africa researcher:
In Morocco, digital surveillance is intimately linked with repression of peaceful dissent – 
people who are peacefully protesting or criticizing the authorities face intimidation, arrest, unfair trials, and sometimes imprisonment. We fear that the more that these surveillance tools 
are sold [to Moroccan agencies], the more we will see human rights abuses, especially in 
relation to freedom of expression and information. (Gallagher and Hager, 2016)
A 2015 Amnesty International report on torture in Morocco between 2010 and 2014 
alleges the DGST participated in torture on multiple occasions and links the organization to secret detentions at a prison in Temara (Amnesty, 2015). In any case, it is clear that the institutionalization of surveillance as part of media infrastructure constitutes a continua-tion of carceral culture and its re-inscription in a hypermediated world.
Engaging with the infrastructural turn in media studies, ADN demonstrates the sig-
nificance of shifting imaginations surrounding media infrastructure and its contradic-tory affordances for increasing openness and diffuse constraints. Analysis of activist 14 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
engagements with and use of media infrastructures, as in the case of Mamfakinch and 
ADN, responds to Parks and Starosielski’s (2015) call for ‘detailed investigation of the varied ways that infrastructures intersect with cultures of everyday life’, which are often missing from infrastructural accounts. The Privacy International/ADN report on cyber-surveillance and working groups on press and penal code reform are indicative of the ways activists challenge state and corporate infrastructural imaginations while attempt-ing to institutionalize alternatives. The distributed technological affordances and net-worked practices associated with smartphones and microblogging allow publics to challenge the gatekeeping power of the state through everyday communicative practices, while transnational civil society networks oriented toward freedom of expression have developed practices for reporting and publicizing abuses. All of this constitutes media infrastructure constructed by users as part of digital popular and political cultures. And yet, as part of a networked public sphere, media infrastructure also makes possible the ability to circumscribe publics in everyday life. This diffuse carcerality permeates rou-tine communicative practices, resulting in complex interactions between the ephemeral and material.
Ultimately, ADN represents a transitional moment in internet imaginaries, both for 
the state and civil society. From Mamfakinch to ADN there is a shift from expectations of economic restructuring and democratic culture to increasingly authoritarian evoca-tions of media infrastructure as a mechanism of visibility and control. In the process we see the mediation of everyday life transformed into a process for the production of social control that is based both in the actual technological capability of watching, but also in activists’ expectations and feelings of being watched. Imaginations of media infrastructure as space for strategizing and solidarity among activists took on the same function for carceral states, ultimately offering new means to constrain infrastructural imaginations.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or 
not-for-profit sectors.
Notes
 1. Citizen Lab does research ‘that monitors, analyzes, and impacts the exercise of political power in cyberspace’. See: https://citizenlab.org/about/
 2. Privacy International (2015: 10) reports that the software itself costs about US$200,000.
 3. It is difficult to get precise numbers because surveillance technologies are inherently secretive and often seen as a sub-category of the defense sector produced by subsidiaries of defense contractors (as was the case with Boeing’s Narus until it was sold to Symantec in 2014). However, a 2010 estimate put global homeland security spending at US$178 billion (Hayes, 
2012). The Spade Defense Index (DXS), which bills itself as ‘an investment benchmark for 
the defense, homeland security and space sectors’, claims the index has outperformed the Standard & Poor’s 500 by nearly 350% over the last 15 years, while identifying ‘emergence of spending on cybersecurity and other advanced technologies’ as an industry trend driving growth (Spade, 2019). For more on these trends see Hayes (2012), Lyon (2017), Mattelart 
(2010) and Privacy International (2016).Iddins 15
 4. These cases have been well documented by scholars of literature, anthropology, and sociol-
ogy, among others. For more information see: Benalil (2011), Daure-Serfaty (1992), Hachad (2017), Menin (2014), Redouane (2011) and Zekri (2006).
 5. L’Alternance, literally ‘alternating’ or a change in power, refers to a period at the end of Hassan II’s reign, when he integrated opposition parties, notably those of the left, into government.
 6. Boukhari alleged that the CIA played a key role in training Moroccan secret police in tactics used against dissidents during the Years of Lead.
 7. On 16 May 2003, young men from the Sidi Moumen shantytown blew themselves up at sites across Casablanca, killing 33 victims and 12 suicide bombers.
 8. ‘Similarly to mobile telephony, four out of five countries with the highest level of Internet user penetration are Gulf Cooperation Countries (GCC) countries (chart 1.13). The only exception in the top five list is Morocco, with a penetration of 33.0 per cent, as of 2008’ (ITU, 
2009: 10).
 9. The UA (Unit of Account) is the official currency of the African Development Bank, which is 
intended to provide standard reporting against the volatility of the currencies in which many of the projects occur and the non-convertibility of some currencies.
10. It is also significant to note that Morocco’s Interior Minister (currently Abdelouafi Laftit) sits on Maroc Telecom’s supervisory board.
11. Amesys was the subject of a judicial inquiry in France (Gallagher, 2012) after the Wall Street Journal reported finding its Eagle software being used by Gaddafi’s regime against its own citizens, along with other surveillance technologies purchased from foreign com-
panies after the UN ended international sanctions against Libya in 2003 (Sonne and Coker, 
2011). Reporters Sans Frontières (RSF) labeled both Amesys and Hacking Team as top five ‘Corporate Enemies of the Internet’ in its 2013 report on cyber-surveillance in the ‘era of digi-tal mercenaries’ (RSF, 2013). Realization of these uses post-Arab Spring led to revisions in 
the Wassenaar Agreement on Arms control to include surveillance software and the European 
Union’s revision of its dual-use policy.
12. In December 2009 and January 2010 two members of the Association of Moroccan Bloggers, Bashir Hazzam and Boubakr Al-Yadib, were imprisoned in conjunction with student protests in Tarhijict: Hazzam for posting a statement calling for the release of student protesters and 
linking to a video from the protest, and Al-Yadib for participating in an illegal protest and 
covering it on his blog. Abdullah Boukfou, the owner of the cybercafé from which Hazzam blogged received one year in prison, the harshest sentence of the three.
13. In addition to Morocco, the leaked files also revealed that Hacking Team had sold to a ‘brutal 
paramilitary security agency’ in Bangladesh, to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency for use in 
Columbia and to an authoritarian government in Belarus, among others (Gallagher, 2015).
References
ADB (African Development Bank) (1999) Projet de développement des télécommunications: 
rapport d’achèvement. Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: ADB. Available at: https://www.afdb.org /fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/ADB-BD-IF-99-323-FR-PCR  
-MAROC-DOC-COMPLET.PDF (accessed January 2017).
ADN (Association des Droits Numériques – Digital Rights Association) (2014a) À propos. 
Facebook.
ADN (2014b) Communiqué, 5 September. Facebook.
ADN (2015) Communiqué, 16 February. Facebook.
Alami A (2015) Moroccan government cracks down on journalists and activists. New York Times, 
11 October: A6.16 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
Amnesty (2015) Shadow of Impunity: Torture in Morocco and Western Sahara. London: Amnesty 
International. Available at: http://www.amnestyusa.org/research/reports/shadow-of-impunity 
-torture-in-morocco-and-western-sahara
Anderson B (1983) Imagined Communities. London: Verso.ANRT (Agence Nationale de Réglementation des Télécommunications) (2001) Rapport Annuel 
2001. Rabat, Morocco: ANRT. Available at: https://www.anrt.ma/sites/default/files/rappor tannuel/Rapport%20Annuel%202001.pdf (accessed January 2017).
Aouragh M and Chakravartty P (2016) Infrastructures of empire: Towards a critical geopolitics of 
media and information studies. Media, Culture & Society 38(4): 559–575.
Belmkaddem Z (2015) Et voilà: Makhzen a effectivement utilisé outils de surveillance par 
Hacking Team contre citoyens. Twitter, 8 July. Available at: https://twitter.com/Onlyzineb /status/618869582795800576 (accessed January 2017).
Benalil M (2011) Écritures carcérales dans les littératures maghrébines. Expressions maghrébines: 
Revue de la coordination internationale des chercheurs sur les littératures du Maghreb 10(2).
Canard J ( (2011) La haute technologie française fait le bonheur des tyrans. Le Canard Enchaîné, 
12 July. Available at: http://reflets.info/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Le-Canard-enchai%CC
%82ne%CC%81.11–12–07.jpg (accessed January 2017).
CIHRS (2015) Morocco should drop charges against freedom of expression advocates and halt all 
restrictions on rights and freedoms. Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, 19 November. 
Available at: http://www.cihrs.org/?p=17614&lang=en (accessed 25 March 2019).
Currier C and Marquis-Boire M (2015) A detailed look at Hacking Team’s emails about its 
repressive clients. The Intercept, 7 July. Available at: https://theintercept.com/2015/07/07  
/leaked-documents-confirm-hacking-team-sells-spyware-repressive-countries/ (accessed January 2017).
Daure-Serfaty C (1992) Tazmamart: Une prison de la mort au Maroc. Paris: Stock.
El Kabsi F (2003) L’implantation d’internet au Maroc: Enjeux et perspectives. Rabat: Royaume 
du Maroc, Centre national de documentation du Maroc. Available at: http://www.abhatoo.net 
.ma/maalama-textuelle/developpement-economique-et-social/developpement-economique  
/nouvelle-economie/secteur-des-ntic/l-implantation-d-internet-au-maroc-enjeux-perspectives (accessed January 2017).
El Yaakoubi A (2015) Moroccan government sues authors of report accusing it of spying – state 
news agency. Reuters, 9 May. Available at: http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-morocco-cyber security-rights-idUKKBN0NU0EW20150509 (accessed January 2017).
FIDH (International Federation for Human Rights) (2015) Maroc: Poursuite du harcèlement 
judiciaire de M. Maâti Monjib, M. Hisham Almiraat, M. Hicham Mansouri, M. Mohamed Sber, M. Abdessamad Ait Aicha, M. Rachid Tarek et Mme Maria Moukrim. 13 November. Available at: https://www.fidh.org/fr/themes/defenseurs-des-droits-humains/maroc-pour  
suite-du-harcelement-judiciaire-de-m-maati-monjib-m-hisham (accessed January 2017).
Foucault M (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage Books.
FPU (Free Press Unlimited) (2016) These seven Moroccan human rights defenders are on trial. 26 
October. Available at: https://www.freepressunlimited.org/en/news/these-seven-moroccan -human-rights-defenders-are-on-trial (accessed January 2017).
Fuchs C (2011) New media, Web 2.0 and surveillance. Sociology Compass 5(2): 134–147.
Gallagher R (2012) How government-grade spy tech used a fake scandal to dupe journalists. Slate, 
20 August. Available at: http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2012/08/20/moroccan _website_mamfakinch_targeted_by_government_grade_spyware_from_hacking_team_.html (accessed January 2017).
Gallagher R (2015) Hacking Team emails expose proposed death squad deal, secret U.K. sales 
push and much more. The Intercept, 8 July. Available at: https://theintercept.com/2015/07/08 /hacking-team-emails-exposed-death-squad-uk-spying/ (accessed January 2017).Iddins 17
Gallagher R and Hager N (2016) Private eyes: the little-known company that enables world-
wide mass surveillance. The Intercept, 23 October. Available at: https://theintercept  
.com/2016/10/23/endace-mass-surveillance-gchq-governments/ (accessed January 2017).
Ghattas A (2015) For Arab human rights defenders, hacking team files confirm suspicions of state 
surveillance. Global Voices, 8 July. Available at: https://advox.globalvoices.org/2015/07/08 
/for-arab-human-rights-defenders-hacking-team-files-confirm-suspicions-of-state-surveil  
lance/# (accessed January 2017).
Graham S and Marvin S (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological 
Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge.
Hachad N (2017) Narrating Tazmamart: Visceral contestations of Morocco’s transitional justice 
and democracy. Journal of North African Studies 23(1): 1–17.
Hacking Team (2016) Hacking Team website. Available at: http://www.hackingteam.it/ (accessed 
January 2017).
Hayes B (2012) The surveillance-industrial complex. In Ball K, Haggerty K and Lyon D (eds) 
Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies. London: Routledge, pp. 167–175.
HRW (Human Rights Watch) (1999) The Internet in the Mideast and North Africa: Free 
Expression and Censorship. New York: HRW, Middle East and North Africa Division. 
Available at: https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/midintnt996.PDF (accessed January 2017).
Iddins A (2018) Mamfakinch: From protest slogan to mediated activism. International Journal of 
Communication 12: 3580–3599.
ITU (International Telecommunications Union) (2009) Information Society Statistical Profiles 
2009: Arab States. Available at: http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un -dpadm/unpan039529.pdf (accessed January 2017).
Klare M (1979) The international repression trade. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 35: 22–27.
Kushner D (2016) Fear this man. Foreign Policy, 26 April. Available at: http://foreignpolicy 
.com/2016/04/26/fear-this-man-cyber-warfare-hacking-team-david-vincenzetti/ (accessed 
January 2017).
Larkin B (2008) Signal and Noise: Media, Infrastructure, and Urban Culture in Nigeria. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press.
Lyon D (2015) Surveillance after Snowden. Cambridge: Polity Press.MAP (Agence Maghreb Arabe Presse) (2015) Accusé d’espionnage de courriels, l’Intérieur porte. 
10 May. Available at: https://www.yawatani.com/societe-rss/8425-accuse-d-espionnage-de -courriels-l-interieur-porte-plainte (accessed 25 March 2019).
Marquis-Boire M (2012) Backdoors are Forever: Hacking Team and the Targeting of Dissent. 
The Citizen Lab, Toronto. Available at: https://citizenlab.org/2012/10/backdoors-are-for ever-hacking-team-and-the-targeting-of-dissent/ (accessed January 2017).
Mattelart A (2010) The Globalization of Surveillance. Cambridge: Polity.Menin L (2014) Rewriting the world: Gendered violence, the political imagination and memoirs 
from the ‘Years of Lead’ in Morocco. International Journal of Conflict and Violence 8(1): 
45–60.
Morocco (2007) E-Morocco 2010 Strategy: Accomplishments, Perspectives and Action Plans 
– Towards Building Our Information and Knowledge Society. Ministry of Industry, Trade 
and New Technologies, Department of Post, Telecommunications, and Information 
Technologies. Available at: http://www.abhatoo.net.ma/maalama-textuelle/developpement -economique-et-social/developpement-social/information-et-communication/politique-d  
-information/e-morocco-2010-strategy-accomplishments-perspectives-action-plans-towards  
-building-our-information-and-knowledge-society (accessed April 2019).
Ottaway M (2003) Democracy Challenged: The Rise of Semi-Authoritarianism. Washington, DC: 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.18 International Journal of Cultural Studies 00(0)
Parks L and Starosielski N (2015) Signal Traffic: Critical Studies of Media Infrastructure. Urbana, 
IL: University of Illinois Press.
Plantin J-C, Lagoze C, Edwards PN and Sandvig C (2016) Infrastructure studies meet platform 
studies in the age of Google and Facebook. New Media & Society 20(1): 293–310.
Privacy International (2015) Their Eyes on Me: Stories of Surveillance in Morocco. London: 
Privacy International. Available at: https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/Their 
%20Eyes%20on%20Me%20-%20English_0.pdf (accessed January 2017).
Privacy International (2016) The Global Surveillance Industry. London: Privacy International. 
Available at: https://privacyinternational.org/explainer/1632/global-surveillance-industry (accessed January 2017).
Privacy International and GreenNet Educational Trust (2003) Silenced: An International Report on 
Censorship and Control of the Internet. Available at: https://citizenlab.org/2003/09/silenced 
-censorship-and-control-of-the-internet/ (accessed January 2017).
Punathambekar A and Mohan S (2018) Global Digital Cultures: Perspectives from South Asia. 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Redouane N (2011) De l’autre côté de la souffrance. Journal of Research in Gender Studies 1(1): 
103–121.
Reflets (2011) Maroc : Le meilleur ami de la France se met au DPI grâce à Amesys, la filiale 
de Bull. Reflets, 30 November. Available at: https://reflets.info/maroc-le-meilleur-ami-de-la 
-france-se-met-au-dpi-grace-a-amesys-la-filiale-de-bull/ (accessed 25 March 2019).
RSF (Reporters Sans Frontières) (2013) The Enemies of Internet Special Edition: Surveillance. 
Available at: http://surveillance.rsf.org/en/ (accessed January 2017).
Sandvig C (2013) Internet as infrastructure. In: Dutton WH, Oxford Handbook of Internet Studies. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 86–106.
Slyomovics S (2005) The Performance of Human Rights in Morocco. Philadelphia, PA: University 
of Pennsylvania Press.
Smith S, Jamaï A and Amar A (2001a) La vérité sur l’assassinat en France de Mehdi Ben Barka. 
Le Monde, 29 June. Available at: https://www.lemonde.fr/archives/article/2001/06/29/la 
-verite-sur-l-assassinat-en-france-de-mehdi-ben-barka_203565_1819218.html?xtmc=ben  
_barka&xtcr=16 (accessed January 2017).
Smith S, Jamaï A and Amar A (2001b) La vérité sur la ‘disparition’ au Maroc de Mehdi Ben 
Barka. Le Monde, 30 June. Available at: https://www.lemonde.fr/archives/article/2001/06/30 
/la-verite-sur-la-disparition-au-maroc-de-mehdi-ben-barka_203728_1819218.html?xtmc  
=ben_barka&xtcr=7 (accessed January 2017).
Sonne P and Coker M (2011) Firms aided Libyan spies. Wall Street Journal, 30 August.Spade Defense Index (2019) Spade Defence Index website. Available at: http://spadeindex.com/ 
(accessed February 2019).
U.S. Department of State (2018) Country Reports on Terrorism 2017 – Morocco. Available at: 
https://www.refworld.org/docid/5bcf1f91a.html (accessed February 2019).
Waltz S (1995) Human Rights and Reform: Changing the Face of North African Politics. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
World Bank (1995) First Telecommunications Project (Loan 2798-MOR): Implementation Completion 
Report (ICR). Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/390421468053361367  
/Morocco-First-Telecommunications-Project (accessed January 2017).
Zekri K (2006) Fictions du réel: Modernité romanesque et écriture du réel au Maroc – 1990–2006. 
Paris: L’Harmattan.
Zuboff S (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the Frontier 
of Power. New York: Hachette Book Group.Iddins 19
Author biography
Annemarie Iddins is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Communication at Fairfield 
University. Her research is situated within the global media studies subfield of communication, focusing on transnational media industries and cultural politics in the Maghreb and its diaspora.