48 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 2019  Volume 2 Number 2 (April)  
 
 
THE FORMATION OF INTERSTATE AND CROSS -BORDER SCIENTIFIC -
EDUCATIONAL AND INNOVATIVE SPACES BETWEEN UKRAINE AND THE 
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES IN THE DIGITAL ECONOMY  
 
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
 
Abstract . By signing the Association Agreement between the EU and Ukraine, Ukraine has 
demonstrated its intention and willingness to integrate into the system of formal institutions of the 
EU, to adopt the EU rules, norms, and practices, which will enable Ukraine to achieve significant 
economic benefits. One of those benefits is the opportunity to build a true scientific -educational and 
innovative partnership with the EU Member States within the European Research Area. This study 
considers opportunities and perspec tives of creating an interstate and cross -border scientific -
educational and innovative spaces between Ukraine as an associated country and the European 
Union Member States taking into account key priorities of the ERA and rapidly growing impact of 
digital technologies. Particular attention has been given to the establishment of a common Polish -
Ukrainian scientific -educational space which could be complemented by the entrepreneurial 
component. The article has identified opportunities, existing prerequisites,  directions, and priorities 
for building Polish -Ukrainian spaces. It has also defined the challenges of formation the European 
interstate and cross -border scientific -educational and innovative spaces as a whole. It has been 
suggested to develop hereinafter  an interstate and cross -border high -tech clusters based on the 
interstate and cross -border scientific -educational and innovative spaces. The scheme and the main 
steps of formation a cross -border cluster of nano - and biotechnologies are proposed.  
Keywords:  scientific -educational and innovative spaces, digital economy, the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution, the European Research Area, digital technologies, high -technology cluster  
JEL Classification:  F2, F5, O31, O33  
 
Author(s):  
 
Viacheslav Lyashenko  
The Institute of Industrial Economics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine , 2, Zhelyabova Street, Kyiv, 
Ukraine, 03057  
E-mail:  slaval.aenu@gmail.com , https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -6302 -0605  
 
Iryna Pidorycheva  
The Institute of Industrial Economics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine , 2, Zhelyabova Street, Kyiv, 
Ukraine, 03057  
E-mail:  pidoricheva@nas.gov.ua , https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -4622 -8997 ,  
 
Citation:  Lyashenko, V., & Pidorycheva, I. (2019). The formation of interstate and cross -border scientific -
educational and innovative spaces between Ukraine and the European Union member states in the digital 
economy.  Virtual Economics,  2(2), 48 -58. https://doi.org/10.34021/ve.2019.02.02(3)  
 
 
Received: January 7, 2019 ,. Revised: February 21, 2019 . Accepted: March 10, 2019 .  
© Author(s) 2019 . Licensed under the  Creative Commons License - Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)  
49 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 1. Introduction  
 
The main source of economic growth and industrial development for developing countries is 
their absorptive capacity, or ability to tap into the world knowledge and technology. This is 
evidenced by the report of the World Bank as part of a series undertaken  by the Europe and 
Central Asia Region (Goldberg et al., 2011). Тhe authors of this research report highlight that 
the process of knowledge and technology absorption is neither automatic nor costless. 
Rather, this process requires extensive, active efforts , particularly – “dense links to the 
global knowledge economy, human capital, and a learning -by-doing process, among other 
factors ”. The main “channels of absorption"  are foreign direct investment (FDI), trade, 
human capital and mobility, research and deve lopment, and flows of codified knowledge 
(patents, standards, and publications) Fig. 1  (Goldberg et al., 2011).  
 
Economic growth , industrial development 
and productivity 
Labour and Capital  
Absorpital
Absorptive capacity Knowledge flows Capital flows
Education and training Trade and foreign direct investment 
Information and communication technology
R&D
Codifies knowledge : patents , standards and publicationTacit knowledge : Migration and R &D collaborationInvestment climate
 
 
Figure 1.  “Channels of absorption”  of knowledge and technology that spur economic growth , 
industrial development and productivity  
Source : (Goldberg et al, 2011 ). 50 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 The availability of effective institutions and dynamic local firms are main conditions  for 
taking advantage of these “channels of absorption ,” hence the importance of regional level 
in world economic processes. The OECD  study found that the most intensive interactions 
between economic agents take place within a radius of approximately 200 km (The 
Organization for Economic Co -operation and Develo pment , 2013 ).  
 
By signing the Association Agreement between the European Union (EU) and the European 
Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, as one party, and Ukraine, as the other 
party, (hereinafter referred to as Association Agreement between the EU and Ukraine), 
Ukraine has demonstrated its intention and willingness to integrate into the system of 
formal institutions of the EU, to adopt the EU rules, norms, and practices, which will enable 
Ukraine to achieve significant economic benefits. One of those benefits is the opportunity to 
build a true scientific -educational and innovative partnership with the EU Member States 
within the European Research Area (ERA) using the above -mentioned  “channels of 
absorption. ”  
 
In our opinion, such a process, o n the one hand, needs to be considered according to 
regional specificity as each region is unique and has its competitive advantages and 
weaknesses that determine its path of development, directions, and priorities of integration 
into European spaces. On t he other hand, the conditions of the digital economy that will 
fundamentally transform human lives, activities of companies and governments in the near 
future should be taken into account.  
 
2. Literature R eview  
 
Contemporary science is looking for the answers to the unprecedented depth and severity of 
socio -economic transformations that engulfed the modern world, to the challenges of 
increasing competition on world markets, to the objective processes of globalization and the 
growing importance of region al factors in the production of knowledge and turning them 
into innovation  (Dźwigoł et al., 2019; Dźwigoł  and Dźwigoł -Barosz, 2018 ).  
 
According to Philip Cooke, globalization of markets has significantly changed the competitive 
conditions for most companies that compete on time, price and quality. As a result, they 
should change their business organization, consumer and supplier relation ships to be 
competitive. But in so doing, companies will be more successful in the global economy if 
they join their efforts in local (regional) environment (Cooke, 2001). Klaus Schwab considers 
regions and cities as centers of innovation networks, which w ill be important for the 
competitiveness of countries at a time of digital revolution (Schwab, 2015).  
 
In view of the rapidly growing fourth industrial revolution, many countries and regions are in 
а difficult situation of transition from a purely industri al specialization, that prevailed in XX 
century, to the economy in which key technologies play the leading role. The World 
Economic Forum  (2018a)  Report provides a list and a description of twelve key emerging 
technologies of the fourth industrial revoluti on Table 1 .  51 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 Table 1.  Twelve key emerging technologies of the fourth industrial revolution  
 
Technology  Description  
Artificial intelligence and 
robotics  Development of machines that can substitute for humans, increasingly in 
tasks associated with thinking,  multitasking and fine motor skills  
Ubiquitous linked sensors  Also known as the “Internet of Things.” The use of networked sensors to 
remotely connect, track and manage products, systems and grids  
Virtual and augmented 
realities  Next -step interfaces between humans and computers involving 
immersive environments, holographic readouts and digitally produced 
overlays for mixed -reality experiences  
Additive manufacturing  Advances in additive manufacturing, using a widening range of materials 
and methods. I nnovations include 3D bioprinting of organic issues  
Blockchain and 
distributed ledger 
technology  Distributed ledger technology based on cryptographic systems that 
manage, verify and publicly record transaction data; the basis of 
“cryptocurrencies ” such as bitcoin  
Advanced materials and 
nanomaterials  Creation of new materials and nanostructures for the development of 
beneficial material properties, such as thermoelectric efficiency, shape 
retention and new functionality  
Energy capture, storage 
and transmission  Breakthroughs in battery and fuel cell efficiency; renewable energy 
through solar, wind, and tidal technologies; energy distribution through 
smart grid systems; wireless energy transfer; and more  
New computing 
technologies  New architectures  for computing hardware, such as quantum computing, 
biological computing or neural network processing, as well as innovative 
expansion of current computing technologies  
Biotechnologies  Innovations in genetic engineering, sequencing and therapeutics, as well 
as biological computational interfaces and synthetic biology  
Geoengineering  Technological intervention in planetary systems, typically to mitigate 
effects of climate change by removing carbon dioxide or managing solar 
radiation  
Neurotechnology  Innov ations such as smart drugs, neuroimaging and bioelectronic 
interfaces that allow for reading, communicating and influencing human 
brain activity  
Space technologies  Developments allowing for greater access to and exploration of space, 
including microsatell ites, advanced telescopes, reusable rockets and 
integrated rocket -jet engines  
Source:  (World Economic Forum , 2018 a). 
 
Rapid growth and diffusion of smart digital technologies will have a fundamental impact on 
the world economy that will have multifaceted nature and will affect all major 
macroeconomic variables – GDP, employment, investment, consumption, trade, inflation e t 
al (Schwab, 2015).  
 
The next five years will be transformational for enterpris es, consumers, and governments. 
The Internet of Things (IoT) will boost the economy through the data and the bridging of the 
physical and digital worlds. Indeed, it is estimat ed that by the year 2023 (Allhoff and 52 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 Henschke, 2018; Bittencourt et al., 2018; Lim, Kwon, and Lee, 2018; Lu, Papagiannidis, and 
Alamanos, 2018 Shelagh, 2018) : 
- only in the United States, the number of smart home devices will exceed $ 1 billion 
(about $ 725 for one family);  
- about 6 million industrial robotic systems will be launched in the world and  annual 
spending on manufacturing IoT solutions will reach about $ 450 billion;  
- governments throughout the world will invest heavily  in IoT devices to stimulate the 
development of smart cities that will be equipped with smart cameras and street lamps, 
traffic control systems in real time, utilities usage, crime control, and environmental factors;  
- annual  investment in this sphere is expected to reach  nearly $900 billion.  
 
Alec Ross notes that rapid development of the Internet of Things is being achieved through 
four main engi nes (Ross, 2017, р. 15):  
1. the number of cars connected up to the Internet on the roads. It is expected that 
within the period from 2015 to 2020, it will grow from 23 to 152 million;  
2. the dissemination of smart devices that are worn as a piece of clot hing or jewelry – for 
only one year between 2013 and 2014 their number was doubled;  
3. the implementation of “smart home” systems. According to  the Juniper Research 
Report ( 2014), the revenues generated from “smart home” services had been set to reach a 
global market value of $71 billion by 2018;  
4. production. McKinsey Global Institute predicts that by 2025 only in the area of 
production the economic influence of the Internet of Things will have grown  from $900 
billion to $2. 3 trillion per year.  
 
Raymon d Kurzweil predicts that there will be a merger between human intelligence and 
artificial intelligence in 2029 and Singularity will come in the year 2045. He defines the term 
“Singularity” as “a future period during which the pace of technological change w ill be so 
rapid, its impact so deep, that human life will be irreversibly transformed” (Kurzweil, 2005). 
Singularity is “an era in which our intelligence will become increasingly non biological and 
trillions of times more powerful than it is today” … it “w ill enable us to transcend our 
biological limitations and amplify our creativity. In this new world, there will be no clear 
distinction between human and machine, real reality and virtual reality” (Kurzweil, 2005).  
 
Raymond Kurzweil defined a number of pr inciples in the concept of Singularity and explored 
them in the book ( Kurzweil, 2005) . The main reason for impending Singularity, in his view, is 
the Law of Accelerating Returns, the basic gist of which is in accelerating the pace of 
technological evolutio n. The development of almost all modern technologies goes at an 
explosive pace, exponentially. Exponential growth can start almost imperceptibly, and then 
quickly accelerate ( Kurzweil, 2005) .  
 
New development models based on intangible component, smart te chnologies and data are 
seen as effective means of addressing the urgent challenges of sustainable development of 
countries, regions, and cities – economic, social and environmental problems. Working 53 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 together in a better way to address the great challenges  faced by humanity is one of the 
main priorities of the European Research Area. In fact, the ERA includes six priorities:  
- building more effective national research systems;  
- optimal transnational cooperation and competition (coopetition ), including the creation 
of a high -quality, accessible research infrastructure;  
- an open labour market for researchers;  
- gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research;  
- optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge, inclu ding through 
digital ERA, open access to scientific publications and data;   
- international cooperation.  
 
As noted in the ERA Progress Report 2016 (European Commission, 2017), cooperation 
between the EU Member States and Associated Countries with the aim  of finding the best 
ways to solve modern challenges “ is central to Europe’s ability to respond to a dynamic and 
changing world .”  
 
Consequently, it is important to examine the perspectives of formation of scientific -
educational and innovative spaces between the EU and Associated Countries considering 
also the features of the digital economy.  
 
Priority attention of many scientists is given to the problem of cooperation in R&D, 
education and innovation both at the country and firm levels, and among the countries. 
Indeed, the study (Gunther et al., 2017) focuses on the analysis of cross -border scientific 
cooperation between Germany and P oland. The role of transnational organizations in 
European innovation policy and of the policy networks established between these 
organizations and supranational institutions is investigated in the work (Grande and 
Peschke , 1999). The authors of the a rticle (Tumelero, Sbragia and Evans,  2019) consider 
scientific cooperation between companies in the sphere of ecological innovations. 
Nevertheless, despite the significant contribution of scientific papers, existing approaches to 
European scientific -educational  and innovative cooperation are limited to the EU Member 
States and do not consider prospects for engagement with Associated Countries such as 
Ukraine.  
 
Therefore, the aim of the study is to identify opportunities and priorities of creating an 
interstate and cross -border scientific -educational and innovative spaces as a means of 
cooperation between Ukraine as Associated Country and the EU Member States taking into 
account the key priorities of the ERA and the major challenges of the digital economy in the 
conditions of Association Agreement between the EU and Ukraine.   
 
3. Methodology  
 
This study was conducted using the following methods: analysis and synthesis, abstracting 
and generalization, and systemic approach being considered as a strategic one to de termine 54 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 opportunities, and priorities in creating an interstate and cross -border European scientific -
educational and innovative spaces.  
 
Systemic approach implies accounting for the interactions among a number of items formi ng 
an integral whole (IGI Global. Disseminator of Knowledge , 2019). In terms of systemic 
approach, a research subject is a system, which has input (resources are transferred to the 
system and affect it), output (an end product of the system), its relations hip to external 
environment and feedback (which is relevant for open systems). The system has also its 
internal structure – a set of interrelated elements that transform input resources into 
outputs and allow to achieve system goals.  
 
4. Results and Discu ssion  
 
In the new geopolitical reality, under the multiple challenges related to digital economy, the 
role of the driver in building „Europe of different speeds ,” could be played by Poland and 
Ukraine (in the post -war “old Europe” this function was perform ed by France and Germany) 
in order to use the “window of opportunity” that provides the transition from the 5th to the 
6th “long wave” of Kondratyev. The example of using this “window of opportunity” was 
demonstrated by the new industrial countries of Sout h-East Asia which have become the so -
called “Asian tigers” when moving from the 4th to the 5th “long wave” of Kondratyev. To 
achieve this, Poland and Ukraine have significant opportunities and competitive advantages:  
- highly  qualified and educated human capital (of 130 countries, Poland and Ukraine 
rank, respectively, 31st and 24th on the Global Human Capital Report 2017 ( World Economic 
Forum , 2018b );  
- advantageous geographical location – in the heart of Europe, at the inte rsection of 
major transport and trade routes;  
- large consumer market unsaturated with individual commodities – the population of 
Poland and Ukraine is respectively 38,2 and 44,4 million people (World Economic Forum , 
2018b );  
- a well -developed network of academic institutions and universities that need to be 
connected to each other and to industry;  
- the industrial capacity requiring large -scale innovation -based modernization to ensure 
high levels and quality of production.  
 
Both countries are particularl y interested in developing defense, energy, scientific -
educational and innovative spaces. With a view to their formation, we have proposed to 
consider Ukrainian universities as a platform for undergraduate education from post -Soviet 
(Azerbaijan, Turkmenist an), Asian (China, Pakistan) and African (Nigeria) countries for 
Bachelor’s degree and further education in Poland and other Member States of the EU for 
Maste r’s degree ( Liashenko & Pidorycheva, 2017).  
 
Actually, the necessary prerequisites for this scena rio implementation are already in place – 
many universities, scientific institutions, and social organizations of Ukraine have concluded 
relevant agreements with universities and innovative structures of European countries. For 55 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 example, a Memorandum o f coo peration between National Science -Technological 
Association of Ukraine, Uzhgorod National University and the Technical University of Košice 
was signed in March 2017 in Košice (Slovakia). In September 2016, similar memorandums of 
agreement were signed betwe en Academy of Economic Sciences of Ukraine, Institute of 
Industrial Economics of the NAS of Ukraine, Poltava University of Economics and Trade and 
from the Polish side – Poznao University of Economics and Business, Higher Vocational 
School in Suwałki and T echnology Park in Suwałki .  
 
Establishment of a common Polish -Ukrainian scientific -educational space can be 
complemented with the entrepreneurial component. Namely, students who have 
entrepreneurial abilities and who are studying in Ukraine (on Bachelor's curriculum) start 
their own business in the business -incubator of the corresponding Ukrainian university and 
then, transfer it to the corresponding domestic scientific or industrial park. While continuing 
their education in Poland (for Master's degree), th ey adapt their small business to the 
relevant technology park in Poland, that makes them already residents of the EU. This allows 
them to enter the large Polish market as well as the Pan -European market, without losing 
ties with Ukraine.  
 
In the process of the formation of interstate and cross -border scientific -educational and 
innovative spaces, the following challenges, that correspond to the priorities of ERA, can be 
solved:  
- development of bilateral and multilateral relations in scient ific-educational and 
innovative spheres in order to achieve maximum results from the convergence of national 
and regional economic interests, the creation of the necessary conditions for the market of 
innovative goods development and providing scientific -educational services;  
- identification of mutual interest zones, allocating priority technology areas in them 
(including key emerging technologies of the fourth industrial revolution) for joint scientific -
educational and innovative projects; creating favor able conditions for their implementation 
for the benefit of states and regions;  
- development of human capital and staffing system of scientific -educational and 
innovative cooperation, professional training of managers and agents of innovative and 
scienti fic-educational programs and projects, among other things, in the sphere of the digital 
economy;  
- effective use of all available scientific -educational and innovative infrastructure, its 
development;  
- implementation  of new mechanisms ensuring closer and more effective interaction 
between the states, scientific organizations, universities, and entrepreneurs;  
- removing of possible legal and administrative barriers, creating of conditions for 
gradual harmonization of national systems of institutional and legal regulation of scientific -
educational and innovative activity, standardization and product/services certification in the 
field of development and production of high -technology products/services, technical 
regulati on and self -regulation.  
 56 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 In building of Ukrainian -Polish scientific -educational and innovative spaces, the following 
inter -state priorities can be defined:  
- institutional ensuring of the realization of interstate and cross -regional scientific -
educational and innovative activities;  
- increase of the innovative activity of enterprises in the production sector  (Kwilinski, 
2017; 2018 a; 2018b; 2018c ; 2018d ; Yakubovskiy  et al., 2017 );  
- introduction of economic and financial instruments and promotion of the reg imes of 
innovative and entrepreneurial activities  (Lakhno et al, 2018;  Pająk et al., 2016 ); 
- effective use of intellectual property, development of its common market;  
- institutional transformation of the innovative sphere, namely, creating conditio ns to 
implement the concept of “ Innovat ive lift: from school to Europe”  (Liashenko & Pidorycheva, 
2017);  
- personnel training and skills development in innovative and entrepreneurial spheres;  
- creation of joint digital and physical platforms, complementary val ue chains, joint 
ventures and other forms of economic cooperation  (Głowski and Kvili nski, 2017);  
- introduction of measures in the field of export and customs.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Scheme of cross -border high -technology cluster formation  
Source:  own research.  
 
Based on the interstate and cross -border scientific -educational and innovative spaces, 
interstate and cross -border innovative systems and high -tech clusters can be created in the 
future. Research suggests that as the first approximation can be proposed the  main steps of 
cross -border nano - and biotechnologies clusters formation shown in Fig. 2 :  
57 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 I. Choosing profiled institution of the N ational Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and 
establishing its branch in the relevant Ukrainian partner university.  
II. Signing  a cooperation agreement with a foreign partner university.  
III. Providing equipment to structural units engaged in research in the field of high 
technology.  
IV. Staffing, internships, academic exchanges.  
V. Providing financing by attracting funds from th e European, national and regional 
programmes, and structural funds, local business structures, through loans, grants and other 
sources not prohibited by law.  
VI. Preparing proposals t o devise national and regional “smart -specialization”  strategies 
and to diversify traditional industries of regions and cities of partner countries.  
VII. Intro duction of new special courses “ Economics and Entrepreneurship ,” 
“Nanotechnologies and Economics ,” “Biotechnologies and Economics”  for physical and 
biological specialti es at partner universities.  
VIII. Providing services of business -incubators for small enterprises and replication of 
developments (nano - and biotechnologies) based on local incubators, science, technology 
and industrial parks.  
 
One of the operating scientific center – Dnieper Scientific Center of the National Academy of 
Sciences of Ukraine and Ministry of Education and Science  of Ukraine – can conduct an 
experiment on formation of Polish -Ukrainian scientific -educational and innov ative space in 
the form of a pilot project of a cross -border high -tech cluster. Scientific and methodological 
support can be undertaken by the Institute of Industrial Economics of the NAS of Ukraine 
and its Dnipro department.  
 
5. Conclusions  
 
Many countri es face serious problems emanating from the fast -growing impact of smart 
digital technologies to all areas of society. In addition, nowadays an active process of 
formation of bilateral and multilateral linkages in various fields of cooperation between 
coun tries is undertaken. This study seeks to consider the prospects of creating interstate and 
cross -border scientific -educational and innovative spaces between the EU Member States 
and Ukraine as Associated Country considering the major challenges of the digi tal economy 
and key priorities of the ERA within the context of Association Agreement between the EU 
and Ukraine. We rely on a systemic approach in order to propose the promising directions of 
cooperation between European countries towards the formation of  the effective scientific -
educational and innovative spaces.  
 
Particular attention in this regard has been given to the creation of a common Polish -
Ukrainian scientific -educational and entrepreneurial space; existing prerequisites and 
priorities of econom ic cooperation between countries are identified.  
 
It has been proposed to form an interstate and cross -border nano - and biotechnology cluster 
as a cooperation tool between Ukraine and the EU Member States. Nanotechnology and 58 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 biotechnology are smart digital  technologies which in the ensuing years will lead to a radical 
transformation of global value chains, will be at the heart of research and development, the 
activities of business structures and government policies, which makes our proposals both 
relevant and perspective. These issues require further more in -depth interdisciplinary 
research. In particular, exploring how the formation of cross -border high -technology clusters 
will allow European countries to take advantage of digital technologies.  
 
 
Reference s 
 
Allhoff, F., & Henschke, A. (2018, September). The Internet of Things: Foundational ethical issues. 
Internet of Things,  1–2, 55 -66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2018.08.005   
Bittencourt, L., Immich, R., Sakellariou, R., Fonseca, N., Madeira, E. Curado, M., Villas, L., DaSilva, L., 
Lee, C. & Rana, O. (2018, October). The Internet of Things, Fog and Cloud continuum: Integration 
and challenges. Internet of Things,  3–4, 134 -155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2018.09.005   
Cooke, P. (2001). Strategies for regional innovation systems: learning transfer and applications . 
Centre for advanced Studies Сardiff University. Retrieved from http://www.paca -
online.org/cop/docs/P_Cooke_Strategies_ for_regional_innovation_systems.pdf  
Dźwigoł, H., & Dźwigoł -Barosz, M. (2018). Scientific research m ethodology in management sciences. 
Financial and Credit Activity: Problems of Theory and Practice, 2 (25), 424 -437. 
https://doi.org/10.18371/fcaptp.v2i25.136508  
Dźwigoł, H., Aleinikova, O., Umansk a, Y., Shmygol, N., & Pushak, Y. (2019). An entrepreneurship 
model for assessing the investment attractiveness of regions . Journal of Entrepreneurship 
Education, 22 (1), 1 -7. 
European Commission. (2017). European Research Area Progress Report 2016. Report from the 
commission to the council and the European parliament. URL: 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2016/era_progress_ report_2016_co
m.pdf   
Głowski, P. & Kvilinskyi, O. (Eds.). (2017). Economic Transformation in Ukraine: Comparative Analysis 
and European Experience.  Warsaw, Poland: Consilium Sp. zo.o. Retrieved from https://institute -
icd.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/07/Monografia_Kvilinskyi.pdf   
Goldberg, I., Goddard, J. G., Kuriakose, S., & Racine, J. -L. (2011). Igniting Innovation: Rethinking the 
Role of Government in Emerging Eu rope and Central Asia . Retrieved from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2358  
Grande, E. & Peschke, A. (1999).  Transnational cooperation and policy networks in European science 
policy -making. Research Policy, 28(1), 43-61. http://doi.org/ 10.1016/S0048 -7333(98)00099 -7  
Gunther, J., Latifi, G., Lubacha -Sember, J., & Tobelmann, D. (2017). Scientific Cooperation  in a 
German -Polish Border Region in the Light of EU Enlargement. Foresight and STI Governance, 
11(1), 42–53. http://doi.org/10.17323/2500 -2597.2017.1.42.53   
IGI Global. Disseminator of K nowled ge. (2019). What is Systemic approach?  Retrieved from 
https://www.igi -global.com/dictionary/systemic -approach/29095   59 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 Juniper Research  Report . (2014).  Smart Home revenues to re ach $71 billion by 2018. Juniper Research 
Finds. Retrieved from https://www.juniperresearch.com/press -release/smart -home -pr1  
Kurzweil, R . (2005). The singularity is near: when  humans transcend biology.  Retrieved from 
http://stargate.inf.elte.hu/~seci/fun/Kurzweil,%20Ray%20 -%20Singu larity%20Is%20Near,%20Th 
e%20%28hardback%20ed%29%20%5Bv1.3%5D.pdf  
Kwilinski, A. (2017). Development of industrial enterprise in the conditions of formation of 
information economics. Thai Science Review,  Autumn 2017, 85 -90. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1414236   
Кwilinski, A. (2018 a). Mechanism of modernization of industrial sphere of industrial enterprise in 
accordance with requirements of the information economy. Marketi ng and Management of 
Innovations, 4, 116 -128. http://doi.org/10.21272/mmi.2018.4 -11 
Kwilinski, A. (2018 b). Mechanism of formation of industrial enterprise development strategy in the 
information economy . Virtual Economics, 1 (1), 7 -25. https://doi.org/10.34021/ve.2018.01.01(1)  
Kwilinski,  A.  (2018 c).  Mechanism  for  assessing  the  competitiveness  of  an  industrial  enterprise  
in  the informat ion economy. Research Papers in Economics and Finance, 3 (1), 7 -16. 
https://doi.org/10.18559/ref.2018.1.1   
Kwilinski, A. (2018 d). Trends of development of the informational economy of Ukraine in the cont ext 
of ensuring the communicative component of industrial enterprises. Economics and 
Management, 1 (77), 64 -70. 
Lakhno, V., Malyukov, V., Bochulia, T., Hipters, Z., Kwilinski, A., & Tomashevska, O. (2018). Model of 
managing of the procedure of mutual financ ial investing in information technologies and smart 
city systems. International Journal of Civil Engineering and Technology, 9 (8), 1802 -1812. 
Retrieved from http://www.iaeme.com/MasterAdmin/UploadFolder/IJCIET_09_08_181/IJCIET_ 
09_08_181.pdf  
Liashenko, V.,  & Pidorycheva, I. (2017). Rehionalni naukovi tsentry NAN Ukrainy ta MON Ukrainy yak 
yadro rozbudovy rehionalnykh innovatsiinykh system v umovakh detsentralizatsii [Regional 
science centers under NAS and MES of Ukraine as the core of the development of reg ional 
innovation systems in the context of decentralization]. Economic Herald of the Donbas, 1 (47), 13 -
20 [in Ukrainian].  
Lim, S., Kwon, O., & Lee, D. H.  (2018, October). Technology convergence in the Internet of Things 
(IoT) startup  ecosystem: A network analysis. Telematics and Informatics, 35 (7), 1887 -1899. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.06.002   
Lu, Y., Papagiannidis, S., & Alamanos, E. (2018, November). Internet of Thi ngs: A systematic review of 
the business literature from the user and organisational perspectives. Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change,  136, 285 -297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore. 2018.01.022   
Pająk, K., Kamioska, B., & Kvilinskyi, O. (2016). Modern trends of financial sector development under 
the virtual regionalization conditions. Financial and credit activity: problems of theory and 
practice , 2(21), 204 -217. https://doi.org/10.18371/fcaptp.v2i21.91052  
Ross, A . (2017). The Industries of the Future . New York City: Simon & Schuster Ltd.  60 
www.virtual -economics.eu                                                                                 ISSN 2657 -4047 (online)  
Viacheslav Lyashenko and Iryna Pidorycheva  
Virtual Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2019  
 Schwab, K. (2015). The Fourth Industrial Revolution.  Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic Forum. 
Retrieved from https://luminariaz.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/the -fourth -industrial -revolution -
2016 -21.pdf  
Shelagh, D. (2018 , July 19 ). How the Internet of Things will transform consumerism, enterprises, and 
governments over the next five years. Business Insider. Retrieved from 
https://www.businessinsider.com/iot -forecast -book -2018 -7 
The Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development. (2013). OECD Reviews of Regional 
Innovation. Regions and Innovation: Collaborating across Borders . Paris: OECD Publishing. 
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1787/19976585   
Tumelero, C., Sbragia, R. & Evans, S. (2019). Cooperation in R & D and eco -innovations: The role in 
companies' socioeconomic performance. Journal of Cleaner Production, 207, 10 January 2019 , 
1138 -1149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.146   
World Economic Forum. (2018а). The Readiness for the Future of Production Report 2018. Retrieved 
from http://www3.weforum.org/docs/FOP_Readiness_ Report_2018.pdf  
World Economic Forum. (2018b). The Global Human Capital Report 2017 . Preparing people for the 
future of work. Retriev ed from https://weforum.ent.box.com/s/dari4dktg4jt2g9xo2o5pksj 
patvawdb  
Yakubovskiy, M., Liashenko, V., Kamioska, B., & Kvilinskyi, O. (2017). Economy modernization of 
indust rial regions (based on the example of Ukraine). In P. Głowski and O. Kvilinskyi (Eds.), 
Economic Transformation in Ukraine: Comparative Analysis and European Experience  (pp. 12 -29). 
Warsaw, Poland: Consilium Sp. z  o.o. Retrieved from https://institute -icd.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/07/Monografia_Kvilinskyi.pdf  