A Guide for 
Refugee ContextsParticipatory 
MappingToolkit
Main Author: 
William Perry Evans
Editor and Co-author: 
Jess Beutler
Contributors: 
Paul Uithol, Tyler Radford, Rupert Allan, Can Ünen, Ezgi Eryılmaz, Gülşah Eker, Mohammed Alshebli, Nate Smith, Rebecca Firth, Mhairi O’Hara, Blake Girardot and Sıla Alıcı.
Design and Layout:
Fırat Yeşilçay and Olca Mutlu at It’s Creat!      http://www.itscreat.com 
Copyright Info: Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 
International (CC BY-SA 4.0)
How to Cite this Document:
Participatory Mapping Toolkit: A Guide for Refugee Contexts, Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team, 2018.
Questions and Info:
info@hotosm.org Acknowledgements:We would like to thank the U.S. Department of State: Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, who supported this work through the Crowdsourcing Non-Camp Refugee Data Through OpenStreetMap Project, which took place simultaneously in Uganda and Turkey. 
Prior to writing, an extensive literature 
review was done to evaluate what other similar guides existed. Inspiration was drawn from the Open Cities project, which is a collaboration between GFDRR, the World Bank, the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team, American Red Cross, U.S. Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, USAID, and Development Seed. 
Additionally, the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development’s Good Practices in Participatory Mapping, MapAction’s Field Guide to Humanitarian Mapping, Pulse Lab Jakarta’s From Urban Data Collection to Urban Design, and the United Nations Development Programme’s Guide to Data Innovation for Development were helpful guides when composing the toolkit.Page 3This toolkit serves as a practical how-to guide 
for participatory mapping in refugee contexts. It 
provides organizations with the necessary tools and 
processes for responding to refugee situations by leveraging open and free map data for humanitarian 
assistance.
It is an actionable guide, aimed at a broad scope 
of actors interested in using mapping in their 
operations. The contents have been written in clear language, so that anyone can pick it up and begin 
to map for humanitarian purposes. In addition, 
each of the tools is self-contained so that users can decide which meet their goals and quickly develop 
the exact skills they need.
Section One introduces what participatory mapping 
is and why it is vital in refugee contexts. It gives 
important background information about the platform used to map and how to use the guide.
Section Two identifies important contextual factors 
that affect how organizations respond. It has been 
written for refugee contexts, and gives users an 
idea of what to keep in mind before getting started. 
Finally Section Three is the heart of the toolkit - a 
series of tools and processes that offer practical solutions for humanitarians.Today we are witnessing the highest levels of displacement on record with over 65 million people 
around the world forced from their homes. This 
guide provides new tools for addressing these crises, while drawing on best practices for refugee 
protection and alternatives to camps. Specifically, 
we have incorporated lessons from the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees 
and Migration and the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees. 
The guide has been prepared by Humanitarian 
OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), a non-governmental organization and global community working to 
map the most vulnerable places in the world for 
humanitarian aid and sustainable development. The toolkit is derived from knowledge learned in the 
field and is fundamentally responsive to people’s 
needs.
The toolkit has everything you need to know 
to get started mapping. If you want to learn more, additional resources have been provided 
throughout for advancing your skills.  For more 
complex steps and examples of the tools and processes presented, we recommend exploring in 
the      HOT Toolbox Wiki on Github.
To access the HOT Toolbox Wiki visit:
https://github.com/hotosm/toolbox/wiki INTRODUCTION TO 
THE TOOLKIT
A tool is a specific program used for mapping
A process is a systematic series of actions used for 
mappingPage 4TABLE OF CONTENTS
Maps and Geospatial Data A Humanitarian Imperative
What is Participatory Mapping? A Means of Protection Mainstreaming
Open Mapping and OpenStreetMap A Movement and a Platform
 Why use OSM? The Google Maps Question
 Trusting the Information Reliability and Validation 
 Accessing and Using the Data Getting the Data and Using it
Data Protection A Human Right1
2
3Section One: 
The Power of  
Participatory
Mapping
Section Two: 
Refugee Contexts
Section Three: 
Tools and Processes Before Getting Started Identifying Contextual Factors 
 Factors Planning and Analyzing
  Political Climate
  Crisis-type 
  Technology   Literacy 
  Accessibility 
 Community Entry How do you enter?
 Participant Selection Who do you work with?
 Safety and Security Expanding Protection Space
 Data Usage Ensuring Impact
iD Editor
Mapathon Aerial ImageryTasking Manager
ODK, OMK, KoboField Data CollectionMaps.me and OSMAndManaging DataDownloading DataExport ToolQGISOverpass TurboJOSM
OSMCha
1
4
11
149
2
51210
3
613
7
8Remote Mapping(Digitization and Editing)
Field Mapping(Data Collection)Map Creation
(Data Use and Analysis)Quality Assurance 
(Data Cleaning )5
6
7
8
8
9
10
11
12
14
3029
31
32
33
34
35
3615
16
17
20
21
22
23
25
26
282719
24Page 5MAPS AND GEOSPATIAL DATA
*Note: You cannot receive GPS signals indoors. GPS receivers are able to receive signals outdoors, unobstructed by trees, 
buildings etc. from the visible portions of the sky.The toolkit focuses primarily on the use of geographic information systems (GIS) to achieve these goals. A GIS is a computer 
system designed to collect, store, edit, analyze, share, and display spatial or geographic data. It relies on a coordinate system, that defines the location of a point - such as the Global Positioning System (GPS)*.  This is a satellite-based navigation system, that can work in any weather condition, anywhere in the world, 24 hours a day. GIS therefore helps represent data from the real world in the form of an informative, understandable and accurate map with the help of mapping software. 
Arua District Health Facilities, HOT Uganda
 What is GIS and GPS?Each disaster or humanitarian crisis is unlike any other. 
While characteristics vary widely, as humanitarians, we often ask the same basic set of questions prior to deployment or entry into a crisis: What happened (or is happening)? Where did it occur? Who and what is most affected? Which are the areas, populations, or sectors with the greatest need? An understanding of “place” or location is at the heart of planning and carrying out a response.
Maps and map data serve as a fundamental tool in answering these questions. While fully understanding a location 
goes far beyond physical geography, basic maps and geospatial data can assist in developing a shared understanding among humanitarian actors in a response. Maps help us answer the question of “where” by indicating areas of forced displacement and areas where resettlement is occurring. They help us answer the question of “who”, indicating which communities and populations have been affected or are in need.
While maps often serve as a navigation tool for responders (and, more recently, refugees) navigating their new 
environments, they go far beyond this: in an era of limited humanitarian resources, they help us accurately prioritize, assess, and deliver. Physical geography is combined with human need to more effectively target response efforts and deliver on or exceed minimum humanitarian standards. If done right, the power of participatory mapping  ensures that these standards are met, and that key protection principles are embedded within the response.
Page 6Participatory mapping is the creation 
of maps by, and using input from, local 
communities. In a refugee context it is a 
way to incorporate protection principles and promote meaningful access to 
information.Participatory maps are visual representations of what a community 
perceives as its place and the significant features within it. They are based on the premise that local communities possess expert knowledge of their environments.
Often different organizations support this process, but an 
emphasis is put on providing skills for the community to create maps themselves in order to represent the spatial knowledge of community members.
Given that there are many components of participatory mapping, it is best to think of it as a kind of 
lifecycle. Revolving around the Community it involves Remote Mapping, Field Mapping, Quality Assurance, 
and Map Creation. Although there is a general process to mapping, you can begin at different points 
depending on your needs.WHAT IS PARTICIPATORY MAPPING?
Prioritize safety and dignity and avoid causing harm - by gathering information directly with and 
for refugees there is regular communication about the impact of interventions, minimizing any negative effects to people’s vulnerability. 
Meaningful access - open data is a philosophy that advocates certain data to be freely available 
to everyone without barriers, enhancing access to assistance and services. This is in contrast to data sets that are collected in proprietary systems that are not easily accessible. 
Accountability - participatory mapping is a practical mechanism that can keep service-providers 
accountable. Refugees themselves are able to directly report on the adequacy of services and address concerns openly.
Participation and empowerment - this is the heart of participatory mapping. Community members 
build their own self-protection capacities and claim their rights by being both producers and users of data. Participatory mapping itself is a tool for empowerment.1
2
3
4
The toolkit enables humanitarians to mainstream protection in their operations because the principles 
of participatory mapping reinforce and ensure the principles of protection. 
Page 7Getting an OSM Account
Some of the tools in this kit require an OSM account. To sign up, go to OpenStreetMap.com and click the Sign Up button. Most people use their email to sign up, but you may also use a third party to log in. You then need to choose a user name and a password. You will then be asked where you reside in the world, and be given an option to make your contributions part of the Public Domain. Once you’ve read the agreement click Agree. You will be sent a confirmation email – sign in and click the link. Now you’ll be taken to a welcome page with some helpful information. Now you can start mapping!
       “Two Minute Tutorial: Signing up for OpenStreetMap”
       https://youtu.be/suk8uRpIBQwOPEN MAPPING AND OPENSTREETMAP
Open mapping is a global movement to create free 
and open geographic data. The platform used for this 
is OpenStreetMap (OSM) – a free, editable map of the 
entire world being built by its users.
You can think of OSM as the “Wikipedia of maps” – it is an online database and global community 
of over 4 million registered users. This community collaborates to build a free and open map of the 
world to which anyone can contribute and which anyone can use in their own context.
The first organized use of OSM in disaster response was following the 2010 Haiti Earthquake. 
As high-resolution imagery of the affected area was made available to the public, over 600 
individuals from the global OSM community began digitizing the imagery and tracing roads and other infrastructure. They made what quickly became the most detailed map of Port-au-Prince in 
existence, which was then used by search and rescue teams to help route supplies around the 
devastated capital and to coordinate many other aspects of the response and reconstruction effort.
It became clear that open mapping could be of tremendous benefit for humanitarian purposes. The experience of OSM Haiti demonstrated that 
volunteers who collaborate around open data can 
quickly create accurate and trusted information. Now, that theory is being put into practice by HOT 
teams in countries around the world, and in refugee 
contexts such as Uganda and Turkey.
OSM allows organizations to engage in participatory 
mapping, creating a bridge between communities and services. Maps are simply a means of conveying 
information and of communication – when used 
in refugee contexts they can help expand the amount of protection space available to vulnerable 
populations.
Haiti Earthquake Damage on OSM
Page 8WHY USE OSM?
The most common question people ask is: Why would you use OpenStreetMap 
if there is Google Maps?  These platforms have many similarities and address 
the same basic human need of knowing where things are. In short, OSM 
represents an open approach to how data is collected and distributed, which makes it fast, free, and flexible; an ideal combination for humanitarians.
Fast: In the case of Haiti, the OSM community needed just a few hours to map earthquake affected 
areas from satellite imagery, in contrast to commercial maps that had no way of responding in such 
a short period. The thousands of active volunteers around the globe are what made this possible, 
and the fact that every update is immediately visible to all other users and is version controlled. In many cases, the OSM community has been able to achieve even higher detail than any other map 
source.
Free: The very idea behind OSM was to solve the problem of restriction by using a Wikipedia model. 
Each edit you make in OSM is owned by you and the community, whereas each change made in Big 
Name map providers is owned by them. Data in these other maps is copyrighted and so it can be subject to licensing fees and contractual restrictions. Advertising companies use geographic search 
results and location information for marketing purposes – they choose which data is relevant to you 
rather than displaying what is actually around you. OpenStreetMap is, and always will be, available for free.
 
Flexible: Finally, OSM is ready for any kind of operation. Many major organizations are choosing OSM for their maps because it allows for customization based on need. It has been used to collect  
functioning and nonfunctioning water facilities in northern Uganda, to map hundreds of thousands 
of shelters in Bangladesh, and to plan logistics for a Yellow Fever campaign in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It allows access to all of the map offline and can be formatted in local languages.  
More to the point, these features of OSM make it appropriate for a refugee context where communities 
and people affected by crisis should be at the center of humanitarian action. This approach has 
been phenomenally successful at creating maps in under-mapped places, serving critical needs. 
Page 9
Perhaps the second most common question is: If anyone 
can access and edit data, how can you trust the information? There is both the fear that people with bad intentions will make malicious edits, as well as the fear that new mappers will enter incorrect data. These are valid concerns and the quality of data is essential to its utility.
A goal of the open data movement is that certain data 
should be freely available, but this does not mean at the expense of accuracy or levels of control. In order to trust information, it should be validated – it should undergo review to ensure that it is correct and useful. 
Organizations can choose the degree to which they validate 
data, before ever uploading it into OSM or making a map. For example, after data is collected in the field it can be evaluated offline and cleaned before being uploaded. In the tools below we explain several ways of doing this.
Within OpenStreetMap changes aren’t forever. Any errors 
can be undone, and there are historical backups of the data. All edits made to the map are recorded in the database with the ID of the user making the change along with a timestamp. Users that vandalize the map can have their editing rights suspended or removed entirely. Overall vandalism is extremely rare, and the large user base means that the OSM community is largely self-correcting.
With more participants the map data becomes better over 
time. Private sector companies – including some of the largest technology firms – are moving to OSM. Therefore, there is increased incentive and tools being used globally to monitor changes and correct errors. With more commercial use the map will become that much better for humanitarians.
Above all, the strength of participatory mapping is in 
local knowledge. Ultimately the data is coming from local communities who are best able to represent their own information and provide more accurate information than could be created by an outsider to that community.So now you want to get the data. There are many ways to download the data from OSM, but it is important to consider how much you want to access and which tool suits your purposes.
In theory, you have access to the entire planet - but this is 
a huge amount of data. You can download the full dataset by going to Planet OSM, but more likely you will select a specific area for download.
For instance, you can export data directly simply by clicking 
the         button on OpenStreetMap. If you do this you are given the option of arranging a bounding box around the area you are interested in downloading by clicking “Manually select a different area.” This is then downloaded as an .OSM file.
There are lots of excellent export resources developed by 
third party providers - in the tools section we will cover three of these in depth: the Export Tool, Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) and Overpass Turbo. All of these allow you to make a more targeted selection of the area you would like to export data for, and export to various well-known and widely used file formats, such as ESRI shapefile and GeoPackage. Once you have downloaded the data there are an equal amount of tools for actually using the data - from analysis to creating maps.
The information collected and added to the OpenStreetMap 
platform is distributed with the Open Database License (or ODbL). This allows anyone to freely copy, distribute, and adapt OSM data. The only requirement is that OSM be given credit in any adapted works, and if the original data is altered, the result should be made available under the same license.
For more information
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Downloading_dataTRUSTING THE
INFORMATIONACCESSING AND 
USING THE DATA 
Page 10DATA PROTECTION
The first protection principle states that organizations 
‘do no harm’ as a result of their actions. Therefore, when collecting data and creating maps, organizations must ensure the data security for vulnerable populations. 
Some data is more sensitive than others and projects may lessen the issue upfront by avoiding the 
collection of personal data altogether. Organizations cannot share someone’s personal information 
– they do not have this right. However, even with generic data collection, organizations should be 
aware of the meaning of data protection and act with sensitivity. 
Refugees are especially vulnerable. Having been forced to flee persecution they remain vulnerable 
throughout their journeys and even when settling into a new environment. They have had their personal information digitally collected and processed many times over by humanitarian agencies. 
From camps, processing centers, NGO offices and programs, registration of those assisted is common 
practice. 
If data gets into the wrong hands, it could represent a threat to refugees’ safety and wellbeing. The 
realities of humanitarian operations are such that organizations often bend to the will of their host states, with government priorities overriding humanitarian concerns. 
We recommend organizations adopt codes of conduct and operational procedures for the ethical 
and principled use of information, especially personal data. Perhaps the easiest way to do this is by 
adopting principles for the use of information in humanitarian crises. 
Throughout the toolkit we keep these principles in mind.  Data protection is a human right.The basis of a refugee’s right to privacy and data protection 
is enshrined within international human rights law. Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
guarantees a 
refugee’s right to protection from any arbitrary interference 
with their privacy. 
For more information see the Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian Action
https://www.icrc.org/en/publication/handbook-data-protection-humanitarian-action 
Personal Data: Any information relating to an identified or identifiable individual, whether by a 
number or other factors specific to the individual.Page 11
BEFORE GETTING STARTED
In Section Two we identify important contextual factors that should be taken into 
consideration before, during, and after operations. The impact of participatory mapping 
can be negative as well as positive, and the success of a project depends on these factors.
First and foremost, we are focusing on 
refugee  contexts. A refugee is someone 
who, by definition, has been forced to flee 
his or her country because of persecution. 
Refugees are an especially vulnerable group, and are entitled to specific rights 
under international law. The application of these rights is directly connected to the 
contexts in which refugees live.
In the toolkit we are covering a range of refugee contexts, in both urban and rural settings. Two areas 
we are not particularly focused on are active conflicts and formal refugee camps. Our experience is largely related to refugee-hosting countries, but it does not mean that these tools could not be of 
service in other situations.
Most refugees today are not in the camps of yesterday. Over 
half of the world’s refugees are now residing in cities. It is UNHCR’s policy to pursue alternatives to camps whenever 
possible. For instance, Turkey is home to more than 3.7 million 
refugees, yet over 90% of them live outside of camps.Even though policy has shifted towards alternatives to camps, crises inevitably lead to camp-like settings. In Uganda, for example, the country grants refugees land to build a home 
and gives the right to travel and work. Yet, this has still led 
to the creation of Bidi Bidi Settlement, said to be one of the largest refugee camps in the world hosting nearly 300 thousand refugees. 
These two contexts are vastly different, and require unique approaches. How an organization en-
gages in participatory mapping always depends on a series of interacting factors. Some are beyond 
the control of any organization, while some can be influenced in the project phases and by the tools 
and processes used.
Next we discuss important factors, how to work with communities and to organize your mapping 
project.  The aim is to benefit refugee populations, so we also emphasize the need to keep refugee communities involved in the process along with humanitarian actors.
Page 12FACTORS
Political Climate - One of the most significant factors for a mapping project is the political 
climate in which it takes place. A hostile climate can make it extremely difficult to carry 
out operations. Governments may either support or oppose refugees and humanitarian 
organizations within their country.
Crisis Type - An important related factor is the type of crisis you are working in, and 
what phase of emergency it is. The most basic question an organization needs to ask 
is whether or not it is a secure environment. The toolkit does not give guidance on 
active conflict areas.An enabling or disabling environment - Is the government receptive to the refugees it is 
hosting? Are they cooperating or constraining humanitarian organizations? 
Legal framework - Is there legislation established to protect the rights of refugees? Are 
there laws allowing citizen data collection? 
Socio-economic conditions - What is the level of economic development and how does 
this affect the society?   
Host community acceptance - What is attitude of the citizens towards the refugees they 
are hosting?
Phase of emergency - The lines are not always clear, and on the ground things are 
much blurrier. Still, there are at least four main phases of an emergency situation, 
each with distinctive features. These include:
The Preparedness Phase  - the period before the humanitarian crisis, where use of 
early warning signals can help avert crisis or prepare the response
The Acute Phase -  the outbreak of a crisis with massive destruction of lives and 
property, along with population displacements
The Chronic Phase  - prolonged crisis, displaced populations are settled in 
temporary locations, whether camps or within host communities
The Post-Crisis Phase  - a return to (relative) peace and security, a period of 
reconciliation, recovery, resettlement, and reconstruction 
Quality
AssessmentNew Challenges
Identi/f_iedAssessing KeyActor’s Goals
Data Usage
Building the EcosystemOpen  Cities
Process Diagra m
D Structural da ta as input ri sk asse ssment that informs retrof itting investments
D Location and charac teristics of critic al facilities for emergenc y prepar edness planning
D Data vi sualiz ations to communic ate the ci ty’s at-risk se ctions to de cision-makers and the public .PLANNING
EXECUTION
Each part of an Open Cities project oﬀers opportunities 
for involving new participants, demonstrating the value of open data, and supporting the growth of the networks organizations and individuals who can continue to Data
CollectionTrainingIdentifying
Contextual FactorsDe/f_ining 
ScopeAssessingExisting Resources
Setting Up
Logistics 
Qual ity Asse ssment is performe d so that problems can be caught  
early, and mapp ers ca n be re-trained as ne cessar y.Asse ss the ge ographic areas or features not covere d, as  
this provides the oppo rtunit y to coll ect additional da ta
 
 
 PLANNING
PREPARATION EXECUTIONDesigning and executing Open Cities projects is a complex task that involves a great deal of coordination with partners, technical and 
scienti/f_ic work, team and volunteer coordination and management, 
and logistical work.  While the format of this book necessarily 
presents these steps as linear, in practice this tasks are ongoing, 
iterative, and happening in parallel.
update the data or champion the work after the project 
itself is complete.  Finding ways to build the ecosystem  
of data contributors and users involved in an Open Cities project is key to long-term sustainability  
and impact.Planning and analyzing the political climate, crisis type, technology 
present, literacy levels, and accessibility
Initiating, nurturing and sustaining relationships to secure a community’s participation and interest
PREPARATIONCommunity Entry
Prioritize the rights of refugees and do no harmEstablishing feedback loops with communities
Data CollectionData UsageMapping Process Diagram
Adapted from the World Bank’s 
Open Cities ProjectData UsageIdentifying
Contextual Factors
Community Entry
Data CollectionEstablishing feedback loops with communitiesPlanning and analyzing the political climate, crisis type, technology present, literacy levels, and accessibility.
Initiating, nurturing and sustaining relationships to secure a community’s participation and interestPrioritize the rights of refugees and do no harm
Adapted from the World Bank’s Open Cities Project Page 13Adapted from the World Bank’s Open Cities Project FACTORS
Literacy - Spatial, or map literacy, isn’t universal. Communities understand space 
differently, and organizations should not assume that people understand maps. Despite 
this, spatial literacy is fundamental and is an important skill to bring to communities.
Accessibility - Being able to reach populations affected by crisis is not always easy. It is, 
however, a basic prerequisite to effective operations, and having difficult terrain or lack of transportation can make a mapping project more complicated.Map Literacy - Are communities aware of the basic conventions of maps, can they read 
them, and do they use them?
General Literacy - Does the community have the ability to read and write? Higher edu-
cational levels can assist the mapping process. 
Terrain Accessibility - Are areas you want to map physically accessible? 
Transportation - How will you reach the site? Is there public transportation or do you 
need to hire vehicles?
Other: Beyond these categories there are other factors you might want to consider:
Culture: How can you approach the local community with cultural sensitivity? 
Partners: Who is there to work with? Are there other organizations on the ground and open to 
collaboration? 
Gender:  What is the best way to promote gender equality in your operations and support all 
people affected by crisis? Identify the specific needs, capacities and priorities of women and girls, men and boys. 
Urban or Rural: Are refugees in one place with access to resources, or are they dispersed in a 
more rural setting? Technology - Most of the tools and processes are connected to computer-based Geographical Information Systems, therefore the availability and state of technology is important to consider. 
Infrastructure - Is there a foundation of technology that supports an organization? This can be related to actual hardware, software, networks, data centers, or the presence of 
electricity. 
Imagery Available - Is there good quality, high-resolution imagery available, from 
satellites or other sources? Using aerial imagery as a background layer is considered to 
be the easiest way to map, particularly when many buildings need to be digitized.
Internet Access - Is there an Internet connection? What is the amount of bandwidth 
or level of connectivity? Many of the tools rely on Internet access. If you don’t have an 
Internet connection, POSM may be a potential solution.
Smartphones - Does the community have smartphones? Though not essential by any 
means, mobile data collection is a recommended method of field mapping and is done 
using smartphones.Page 14COMMUNITY ENTRY
Community entry is the process of initiating, nurturing and sustaining a relationship in order to 
secure a community’s participation and interest in a program. Here were are speaking mainly of the 
refugee community*, but equal attention should be paid to the host community.
A few practical questions can guide us: How can you involve a refugee as part of a project? How do 
you enter a community for the first time – and do you need permission?
The most important thing to keep in mind is how refugees can be part of the work as members of 
projects. They must be given ownership. Before starting a project, objectives and strategy should 
be shared with community members. They should give feedback, and this should be incorporated. 
If refugees are not given roles in the project, both in terms of strategy and implementation, you will 
face problems down the road.
Refugees are used to seeing new projects with skepticism, and for good reason. Many 
organizations and individuals use humanitarian crises as opportunities to exploit 
people – whether deliberately or through incompetence. It is crucial to build trust and respect between the organization and community.
Though protected under international law, refugees in host countries are subject to municipal and 
national authorities. The presence of refugees can put pressure on host communities, which often fuels prejudice. Therefore, the final aspect of successful community entry is taking into account the 
host community’s concerns. Permission should be sought from local authorities – they may or may 
not endorse the project, but should not be ignored.
Tips:
Have a consultation meeting to gather feedback from refugees
Include a community member as part of the team
Create a WhatsApp group to communicate quickly
Articulate benefits to host communityWork through partners
*However, no community is homogenous. It would be more accurate to refer to refugee and host 
communities.
Page 15PARTICIPANT SELECTION
So, how do you select the right individuals to work with?
There are three basic principles:
Traditionally the term “beneficiary” has been used only to describe those affected by a crisis. Now it 
is widely recognized that beneficiaries should also be active participants in determining their own 
fates. This is also the core of participatory mapping – beneficiaries should be actors and partners 
in humanitarian projects.
Tips:
Establish a “refugee council” who can help to represent the community – people you can trust 
who have deep cultural knowledge
Take into consideration pre-existing social, cultural and political dynamics or practices that 
may marginalize or exploit certain groupsPayment As a general rule it is good practice to cover costs of active participants. For example, if 
volunteers join your team as field mappers they should be paid per diems to cover transportation and food. Projects rely on the data these volunteers collect, so it is an integral part of the work and should not be treated lightly. Of course unpaid volunteers can and should also be active participants, but organizations must judge when the line is crossed into work to avoid exploitation. Lastly, be mindful that even seemingly small payments can affect power dynamics in refugee communities and households.   
Gender Organizations should be sensitive to gender but avoid using it as criteria to determine 
participants, aligned with the non-discrimination principle. Within families, paying one member but 
not another can have unintended consequences - either positive or negative. Active participation by 
the affected population 
is essential to providing 
assistance that best meets their needs. The first criteria 
for participant selection 
is being from the local community.Community Motivation Non-discrimination
Participants should have strong reasons for working. 
Motivations vary, but one 
of the strongest factors is being emotionally invested 
in a project. Feeling like 
you are making progress in meaningful work is a 
powerful motivator.Non-discrimination – no 
one should be discriminated 
against on any grounds 
of status, including age, gender, race, color, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation, 
language, religion, disability, health status, political or 
other opinion, national 
or social origin. None of these should be criteria in 
determining participants. Page 16SAFETY AND SECURITY
In accordance with the first protection principle – do no harm – organizations must prioritize safety, 
especially of refugee populations. In non-camp situations one of the key goals is expanding the 
amount of protection space available.
The idea of ‘protection space’ does not have a legal definition – it is a concept that means the extent 
to which a conducive environment exists for the internationally recognized rights of refugees to be 
respected and their needs to be met. In most refugee situations, protection space is not static, but 
expands and contracts over time according to changes in the political, economic, social and security environments. 
Each context is so different that it is difficult to make specific recommendations for safety. 
Organizations should establish contingency plans to address the different types of security incidents 
that may occur. Staff should coordinate all responses to such incidents so as to safeguard the rights 
and well-being of refugees, and ensure that staff members and volunteers are not put at risk. 
For operations, the key to effective safety and security management is the creation of a culture of 
security. Each staff member and volunteer has a responsibility for their own safety and security, and that of other team members.
It is possible that in a conflict situation making a community visible will do more harm than good. At 
the end of the day, each organization must determine whether they should be mapping at all.
Tips:
Know the emergency services numbers for the country of deployment
Always have access to a first aid kit; teams should have someone trained as well
Let people decide where they work and feel most safe inAvoid performing field work alone
Always obtain relevant permits, licenses, permissions, and visas for work
Develop a country specific security plan; and incident and suspicious activity reportsEstablish a process for regular monitoring and review of hazards 
Sign up for travel alerts from your embassy
Page 17DATA USAGE: ENSURING IMPACT
Beyond all of the various factors one must keep in mind when engaging in mapping projects, 
organizations should never lose sight of their original goal. The first humanitarian principle states 
that, “The purpose of humanitarian action is to protect life and health and ensure respect for human 
beings.” More to the point, data is only impactful insofar as it is used – ensuring that it actually benefits refugees should always be kept foremost in mind.
However, this is much easier said than done. Within the humanitarian community there is no accepted 
definition of ‘impact’. At the same time, its importance has moved up the agenda in recent years. Donors expect you to demonstrate results even when assessment of impact is, in fact, consistently 
poor. There is also the problem that when attempting to measure impact it can restrict the focus to 
the intended effects of an intervention, rather than incorporating the wider indirect and unintended consequences.
Despite these complexities the best way to ensure impact is to directly involve refugees within 
projects. Ideally they will be involved at all stages of the project cycle, but if this is not feasible 
they should at least be consulted beforehand and shown the products of the data afterwards. The following are some tips for doing this:
Tips:
Consult with refugees from Day One 
Refugee voices should help design the data model (what information is collected)
Be mindful of language barriers – a great potential use of OSM is in providing information in 
the native language of refugees
Establish regular feedback loops with refugees by visiting community centers to share map-
ping products
In terms of information dissemination, participatory mapping projects should aim to develop 
strong networks with refugees
Read the Northern Uganda Case Study to learn about how refugees were incorporated into a participatory mapping project to 
ensure impact in Northern Uganda. Page 18TOOLS AND PROCESSES
Field
Mapping
Remote
Mapping
MapCreationQualityAssuranceCommunityiD Editor
Tasking Manager
OpenAerialMap
Export Tool
HDX
Overpass Turbo
QGIS
 JOSM
OSMChaODKOMKKoboMaps.me
OSMAnd
POSM
iD
In Section Three we introduce fourteen tools and processes that can be used in participatory 
mapping projects. The diagram above shows the different categories of the mapping toolkit. It is 
divided into four different phases, which flow into one another but do not have a required order.Page 19REMOTE MAPPING (DIGITIZATION & EDITING)
Remote mapping is the process of modifying or adding in new data to areas from a distance. 
Usually it involves the use of a software program, tracing information from satellite imagery, and 
then uploading the results so that it can form part of the map data. Using imagery to draw points, 
lines and shapes on the ground is also called digitizing. Some people also simply call this process ‘armchair mapping’ because you can contribute without leaving your chair.
The objective of remote mapping is to cover a large area quickly, obtaining a high-level overview 
of what is actually on the ground. It allows people to directly contribute to a humanitarian project 
even if they cannot be physically present in the field. This also means that it is an entirely safe 
process, since it can be conducted from any location with the necessary technology. 
In general, the first step is often identifying an area that needs to be mapped. Then it is important 
to determine if there is suitable imagery. A project can be created covering a certain area, and the level of detail required and urgency should be specified. The work is divided by remote mappers 
who each map a part of the overall area. This is checked by a second remote mapper who makes 
sure it is correct – a process called validation.
While there are many advantages of remote mapping, there are also some disadvantages. Data 
accuracy tends to be less when users do not physically visit the places they are mapping, favoring quantity over quality. If you are contributing to an area where data already exists in OpenStreetMap, 
and where local people have been contributing, you can even undo the hard work of field mappers 
if you do not follow instructions. The last problem is mitigated by following some basic guidelines:  
For more details:
Remote Mapping at LearnOSM (http://learnosm.org/en/coordination/remote)Learn to recognize valuable data – figure out who has done what, and avoid changing data that 
is accurate
Specify what sources you are using – you can do this by adding the proper source=* tag in the 
changeset comment Remember imagery can be wrong – it can either be misaligned from reality in one particular 
direction. Rather than moving the data, realign your background imagery layer to match
You can leave a fixme=* tab on elements, or a note=* tab to make a comment for validationWhen in doubt, assume that existing data has been mapped by local people on the groundIn general, you can be more relaxed about remote mapping in areas of the world which are 
more remote, or otherwise have less pre-existing data
There are no perfect mappers and although you – and everybody else – will do your best to avoid mistakes, 
mistakes are inevitable.“ “Page 20
01 iD EDITORA simple in-browser
editor for OpenStreetMap
Key Steps For Using iD Editor:
Short Summary:
Skills and Technology
Needed:The iD editor is a user-friendly tool that allows you to 
directly make changes in OpenStreetMap.
Computer
Internet connectionOSM account
The iD editor can be used in most situations. One 
area of concern, however, is making sure not to enter any information which could be potentially 
harmful to refugees. For example, sensitive 
information about nationality, religion, or gender should not be uploaded into OSM.1. Open your Internet browser, and go to the 
OpenStreetMap website athttp://www.openstreetmap.org
2. Log in using your OSM account
click the            button the top right corner
3. Go to the place you want to edit – either by entering 
the location in the search box, or by panning and zooming to the area you wish to edit. You can pan by holding the left mouse button and dragging the map to your desired area.
4. Click on the small arrow next to
Then click Edit with iD (in-browser editor)
a. For first-time users there will be a prompt for a walkthrough that begins inside the editor – it is helpful practice for learning the basics, and learning new words and concepts (it is always accessible through the Help icon)
5. You can add points, for example, placing a well or latrine in your area entering in relevant known details. You can draw lines, for example adding a road that hasn’t been drawn. Or you can draw areas, for example tracing a building that hasn’t been digitized.
6. Note: nothing will be uploaded to OSM until you click 
the Save  button. You can enter any comments about your 
edits, and if you are uncertain there is also the option “I would like someone to review my edits” for extra validation.
7. Now you are ready to edit the map!
For more details:
Learn iD Editor  (https://learnosm.org/en/beginner/id-editor/)
iD Editor Wiki (https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/ID)
Contextual Factors:Page 2102 MAPATHON
Short Summary:
Skills and Technology 
Needed:A mapathon is an organized gathering of people 
to add data to OpenStreetMap. It is usually held 
inside but can also be outside. It can be a project 
to improve the map in your local area, or to help 
response teams on the ground during an emergency, 
or a Missing Maps Project for ongoing or future 
humanitarian responses. Hosting a mapathon is 
relatively simple and requires no special skills or 
previous mapping experience.
A mapathon can quickly digitize an area for 
response, giving humanitarians a better idea of 
where a community is and what is on the ground. It 
does rely on the presence of technology – at least 
computers and an internet connection. Additionally, 
there needs to be imagery available in order to map 
effectively. It also requires advanced planning, to 
coordinate and prepare for the event.A coordinator who can train the participants
A space that fits your group, tables and chairsComputers for every participant, miceWi-Fi1. There is no one right way to organize a mapathon. It may 
depend on what resources you have avvailable, as well as what your priority is – do you simply want to add data to the map, or introduce people to a project?
2. Once you have determined your priority, it is helpful 
to find a co-organizer as a well-run mapathon requires preparation beforehand. It can be helpful to work with other groups, and include them in the process.
3. Pick a location, whether a university, library, or an office. 
Keep in mind it is important to have a strong internet connection at the location to avoid connectivity issues.
4. Do outreach with local organizations and the community 
to invite people. Use email lists and social media to get the word out about the event. It is helpful to ask for RSVPs so you can have any idea of how many people will be attending.
5. At the event introduce OpenStreetMap and the project 
you will be assisting with. Give an example of another case where a mapathon has had an impact to help motivate people. Often you will have new mappers who have no background, and mapathons can be positive experiences for building a community of mappers.
6. Register new users on OSM, and teach the basics of the 
tools the participants will be using.
7. Get mapping! Be ready to answer questions and help out. 
It is best to create an open environment where mappers 
share challenges and solutions.
There are excellent in-depth guidance materials on 
hosting and managing a mapathon online, see below. For more details:
Missing Maps (https://www.missingmaps.org/)Manage a Mapathon (http://learnosm.org/en/coordination/mapathon) Key Steps for Hosting a Mapathon:
A coordinated
mapping event
Contextual Factors:Page 22
03AERIAL
IMAGERY
Short Summary:
Contextual Factors:Aerial imagery is a term used to describe photographs 
that are taken from the sky. This can be done from airplanes, drones, helicopters, or even kites and balloons, but the most common source of imagery comes from satellites orbiting the Earth. These photos can then be manipulated so that they can be used in GIS software. 
One of the most basic questions to ask in a humanitarian 
context is what is the state of the available imagery? Do you need up-to-date imagery? If there has been a rapid evolution of the situation on the ground, for instance with the emergence of refugee camps, new imagery needs to be obtained. If there is not satellite imagery available, does the host country have legislation allowing UAVs, and what permissions are required? 
OpenAerialMap is a set of tools for searching, sharing, and using openly licensed satellite and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) imagery. OAM offers a worldwide “canvas” on which various organizations can contribute to a patchwork of imagery. Open imagery can be critical for responding to crises – OAM makes it easy to host and access imagery for humanitarian response, which is custom and up-to-date. 
Aerial Imagery at LearnOSM (http://learnosm.org/en/josm/aerial-imagery)Discover by DigitalGlobe (https://discover.digitalglobe.com) OpenAerialMap (https://map.openaerialmap.org)GEOSS Portal (http://www.geoportal.org)USGS Earth Explorer (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov)Map Compare (https://tools.geofabrik.de/mc/ or https://mc.bbbike.org)Assessing: It is important to assess what is the best 
imagery for your purposes. Experiment between imagery to see which is better, some may be out of date and not reflective of the current situation on the ground. You need to use your own personal judgement to determine which sources best match your needs. 
Using: There are many different ways you can use imagery, 
as well as different tools that rely on imagery. For instance, 
in Cox’s Bazar humanitarians are using drones to assist with site planning and management.Finding: The easiest starting point is to check for imagery 
in iD Editor. Simply click on Background Settings to see 
what imagery is available. The imagery is provided for free and is licensed. Another option is to look at Discover, DigitalGlobe’s imagery search tool. If you need other sources of imagery another option is to either capture it yourself using a drone, or by finding aerial imagery uploaded by others.  
Common Sources of Aerial Imagery:
Bing Aerial ImageryDigitalGlobe ImageryEsri World ImageryCustom (drones)
For more details:
Finding, assesing and 
using imagery
Satellite imagery highlighting the differences of urban and rural settings, from Istanbul, Turkey; PTP Camp, Liberia; Mvepti, Uganda and Cox’s Bazaar, Bangladesh.Satellite imagery highlighting the differences of urban and rural settings, from Istanbul, Turkey; PTP Camp, Liberia; Mvepti, Uganda and Cox’s Bazaar, Bangladesh.Page 23
04TASKING
MANAGER
Short Summary:
Contextual Factors:Skills and Technology 
Needed:The Tasking Manager is a mapping tool designed 
to divide up a mapping project into smaller tasks 
that can be completed rapidly with many people 
working on the same overall area. This also avoids 
conflicts or duplication of people working on the 
same project. It shows which areas need to be 
mapped and which areas need to be validated. 
The tool allows monitoring of the overall progress 
and helps improve the consistency of mapping. 
It can be used either by an administrator who 
manages a project, or by mappers working to 
complete an area.
Here we are specifically referring to the HOT 
Tasking Manager, which is only used for emergency 
situations that are in the preparedness or acute 
phases. The goal of this is to focus on the most 
urgent crises, most of which involve displacement. 
The steps below describe what to do if you are an 
administrator managing a task.Note: To request project manager permissions, send an email to either 
info@hotosm.org or mapper-support@hotosm.org and they will make sure you get set up.
Computer, Internet connection, OSM account
How to create a GeoJOSN (optional)How to create a JOSM Preset (optional)1. Open your Internet browser, and go to the Tasking 
Manager at https://tasks.hotosm.org
2. Log in using your OSM account – click the Login button 
the top right corner, which will ask you to authorize access to your OSM account – click Grant Access
3. Now that you have logged in click on the arrow next to 
your username and select Create new project
4. Define your Area of Interest on the map, either by 
drawing it, importing a file, or using an OSM file; you should be familiar with the geographical area of the task
5. Choose Tasks Type – either select a square grid or 
arbitrary tasks
6. Set Task Sizes – split the area into larger or smaller tasks. 
You will need to decide an appropriate size, depending on the amount of features that need to be mapped.
7. Trim Project – cut the task grid to only the Area of 
Interest, this is optional8. Review – here you will be able to see what your project 
looks like and how many tasks you have created
9. Now you have created a project! You can now enter a 
detailed description and instructions and then publish
For more details:
OSM Tasking Manager Wiki 
(https://wiki. openstreetmap.org/wiki/OSM_Tasking_
Manager)Learn How to Use the Tasking Manager(https://tasks.hotosm.org/learn)Key Steps for Creating a Task:A tool for collaborative 
mapping
Page 24FIELD MAPPING (DATA COLLECTION)
There are a variety of tools to use for field mapping, including GPS and even paper-based methods. 
In the toolkit we focus on using smartphones. We prefer OpenDataKit, OpenMapKit, and KoBoCollect 
for data collection, and recommend Maps.me and OSMAnd for navigation.  Decide what data you plan to collect. What data do you need to solve or improve the problem 
you’re working on?Define the area for your field mapping. If applicable, divide it between mapping teams. Prepare materials for the field: reference map, GPS or mobile phone and mobile data collection tools, notepad and pen.Go to the target area and collect the data you need.Return to your computer and input the data into OSM. In the Field Data Collection process, we will go into more specific steps and details to consider for mapping fieldwork.1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Field mapping is a survey technique to capture the 
details of one’s physical surroundings. Usually this 
involves going out to map a level of detail that cannot be 
seen from aerial imagery. This is necessary for creating a detailed and accurate map.
There are many different situations for which this could 
be useful. For example, you could collect data on where the hospitals and clinics are located in a certain area, 
and identify which ones specifically offer maternal care. 
Or you could collect the waterpoints and households in an area to find out which households are 
more than 1 km away from a potable water source. You could even collect the names of streets to 
ease navigation for your logistics.
The goal is to examine and record an area’s features so as to create a map. By going in person you 
are “ground truthing” the data, which means that you are directly observing it, ensuring its accuracy.
Page 25
05OPEN DATA KIT
OPEN MAP KITKOBO COLLECTMobile tools for field data 
collection
Contextual Factors:
Key Steps to Setting up ODK:Short Summaries:
Open Data Kit (ODK) is a free an open-source set of tools 
which help organizations author, field, and manage mobile data collection solutions. ODK Collect is part of ODK and is an Android app that replaces paper forms used in survey-based data gathering. It supports a wide range of question and answer types, and is designed to work well without network connectivity.
OpenMapKit is an extension that launches directly 
from within ODK Collect when the OSM question type is enabled in a standard survey. It is what allows you to browse OSM features, and to create and edit OSM tags.
Finally, KoBoCollect is in almost all ways similar to ODK 
Collect, and is built on top of the ODK platform. Kobo 
also has prebuilt analysis tools and is another popular option.  ODK Collect can be used in almost any setting, it is very versatile. Once forms have been downloaded it does not depend on the internet until uploading.
1. Install the ODK Collect on your phone – it can be downloaded 
from the Google Play Store
*(For OSM compatibility, install OpenMapKit from the Google Play Store)
2. Generally organizations first fill out a form and then upload it 
to a server.
*One way to do this is by creating a form online with ODK Build, though you can 
also build a form in Excel.
3. To download the form, open ODK on your phone and go to 
General Settings, then click Server.
4. Enter in your server information, return to the home 
screen and select Get Blank Form, then select your form. 
5. In order to begin taking a survey select Fill Blank Form - 
now you’re ready to collect data!
Skills and Technology Needed:
Computer
Internet ConnectionOSM AccountServer
For more details:OpenDataKit (https://opendatakit.org)ODK Guide (https://docs.opendatakit.org/collect-intro) ODK Build (https://build.opendatakit.org) Another Option for Building ODK Forms(http://xlsform.org/en) OpenMapKit (http://openmapkit.org)KoBo Collect (https://www.kobotoolbox.org)
Page 2606FIELD DATA
COLLECTION
1. Coordinate with the local administration of the 
area you will be mapping
This entails identifying and contacting partner 
organisations working locally in the area that you 
are planning to map.
Contacting these can be done via email, however, 
a letter or document detailing your intent weighs 
much more.
2. Obtain authorization from district and other 
officials
It’s important to inform and get authorization from 
district officials. Write to the appropriate local 
official, copying relevant district-level authorities.
Once you receive a letter of authorization, copy 
it to have on hand and distribute to higher-level authorities to make them aware of your project. 
3. Prepare relevant field data collection tools and 
guides
To collect good data you need to employ a well-
defined data model. A data model reflects the 
information you want to capture. 
After establishing a solid data model, it is important 
to create logical Field Data Collection Forms that 
capture the data you are looking for in the best 
way.
4. Recruit mappers
Mappers will in most cases be drawn from 
community members, refugees, students or 
partner organisation staff.
5. Train mappers
It is useful to create a training schedule. Usually 
two days are enough time to cover data collection and discuss the community’s needs. This is also an 
opportunity to select your field mappers.There is no one way to collect data in the field 
and it will vary by context – but the following 
steps cover the essential steps you should take.  
6. Find transportation 
This can also be an opportunity to match the refugee 
and host community together. In Uganda motorbike riders provide a much-needed element of local knowledge, complementing the actual field mappers.  Work with mappers or local partners and stakeholders to recruit motorbike riders.
7. Field Mapping map guides (maps production)
Strategically organize and subdivide the area to be mapped.Using QGIS, prepare relevant guide maps that mappers will use in the field.
8. Field mapping – guide participants during data collection
Mappers should be well equipped with mobile phones having all the relevant tools and accessories to facilitate field mapping.Mappers move to the field with a mission order for their safety and comfort operating in these communities.Mapped data is sent to the server.
9. Field Data Cleaning and upload to OSM
Following the field data cleaning workflow, all collected data is cleaned and uploaded to OSM. Reviewing the data before upload ensures that the quality is good before it is shared. 
10. Schedule follow-up at a later date
It is good to meet after field data collection activities to review the challenges faced in the field. This could take the form of a mapathon.Your Field Mapping
Playbook
Page 2707MAPS.ME &
OSMAND
Key Steps for Maps.me:
1. First download Maps.me from the Google Play Store2. Maps.me has maps for every country in the world. There are at 
least three different ways you can download these
Zoom in to the area you are interested in until a Download 
button appears. 
Tap the country/city name on the world map and then tap 
the download icon Find a map in the list of countries 
(Menu → Download Maps)
3.  Now you have access to this map offline. To zoom in, use your 
fingers or double tap the screen. To see information about a feature simply tap its icon. If the map is upside down just tap 
the compass icon. To determine your current location, tap the 
geolocation button in the lower left corner (make sure location services are enabled on your device first)
4. To search for something on the map simply tap the search 
icon and then type the name into the search bar. You can also 
search by keyword or even by typing in the exact coordinates (Ex. 43.9775, 15.3854)
5. To create a route choose your destination then tap the 
route icon at the bottom of the screen. You can select either a 
pedestrian route or a car route and then select Start.
6. Perhaps one of the most useful features of Maps.me is the 
built-in map editor. You can add new places to the map or edit 
existing ones. In order to have these changes available to others you should open the app settings, go to Profile, and log in with 
your OSM account. 
7. To add a new place to the map you can go to the menu and 
then press Add a place to the map. Select the correct location of 
the object and then press Done in the top right-hand corner. You 
can then fill in other details. These will then be automatically 
uploaded to OSM within a few hours.Offline maps and
navigational tools
Short Summary:
These are two open source mobile applications 
that can be used with iOS and Android devices 
that provide offline maps, especially useful 
for navigation. They get their data from 
OpenStreetMap. The beauty of both apps is that 
the maps work with no connectivity– all they need 
is your phone’s GPS. 
Skills and Technology 
Needed:
Mobile phone
Internet Connection (for initial download)OSM Account
Contextual Factors:
In situations with low levels of internet these can be 
especially useful offline maps. The simple interface 
also means they are easy for anyone to learn and 
use. Because they are user-friendly they can be 
used for crowdsourced data collection, expanding 
humanitarian mapping beyond the staff of any project 
into the wider community.Key Steps for OSMAnd:
The app can also be downloaded from the Google Play Store. 
When opened it will determine your location and suggest a 
map to download. As with Maps.me, you can zoom in, search for points of interest, and use the GPS to find your location. 
One of the most useful features of OSMAnd is recording tracks. 
To enable this, go to the menu, then Maps & Resources, then Plugins at the bottom, make sure Trip recording is active. To 
start recording your tracks, press the GPX button in the top 
right corner. For more details:
Maps.me Support https://support.maps.me/hc/en-us
OSMAnd Help Pages 
http://osmand.net/help/HowToArticles.htmlPage 2808MANAGING  
DATA
After collecting data, you’ll need to get the data from the devices. Sometimes, it works to simply 
collect and process data directly from the data collection devices. However, this does not scale well 
when you get more people collecting data, and also means your data is not backed up - if you lose 
the device, you can lose the data. Prior to data collection, it is important to have a data management strategy that is suited for your operations.
Server Management
A server is a central repository that manages access to data in a physical (offline) or cloud (online) location. Servers 
can ease operations with higher numbers of data collectors and to reduce the risk of losing data. Using a data collection server allows for much better management of forms and deployments, collection and aggregation of 
responses, and can offer additional features for viewing, analysing and exporting data. Use of a server may be 
restricted by available resources (cost of a physical server) and/or internet connection (access to cloud server). The most used options are:
Server-less Management
If the use of a server is not available to you, it is still possible and crucial to store backups of data. In this case, data 
will need to be downloaded or otherwise shared with a central location, such as a laptop computer, and cloned to a secondary location such as a hard-drive or second computer. For more information about a server-less data management workflow, visit: https://github.com/hotosm/toolbox/wiki
Data Security
If collecting personally identifiable information (PII) or other sensitive data, especially when working with refugees, it is crucial to take 
additional steps for data security. All data collection and storage devices (i.e. mobile phones, laptops, servers) should be password 
protected to prevent unauthorized users from accessing data. Data should only be transferred across private and secure networks, and cleared from devices after data back-up.POSM is a physical server that 
contains a set  of OpenStreetMap tools, including OpenMapKit server. POSMs allow multiple users to connect and upload data from data collection devices to a central location without the need for internet access. This data can then be aggregated using the OMK Server and synced with OSM directly or downloaded for analysis and processing. More information about acquiring and using POSM can be found here: 
http://posm.io/
An online application that allows 
users to build Kobo/ODK surveys as well as store, aggregate, and perform analysis of Kobo/ODK data. Several organizations  offer hosted instances for humanitarian use, such as UN OCHA at
https://kobo.
humanitarianresponse.infoODK Aggregate is an online application (local options possible) that stores, aggregates, and allows users to perform basic analysis on ODK data. More information on ODK Aggregate can be found at:
https://docs.opendatakit.org/
aggregate-intro/ OpenMapKit server / POSM
ODK Aggregate KoBo Toolbox
Organizing and Maintaining 
Data ProcessesPage 29QUALITY ASSURANCE (DATA CLEANING)
Quality assurance is the maintenance of a desired level 
of quality in a product. The higher quality your data is the 
more useful it is, so it is essential to manage the process 
along the way. OpenStreetMap is often more up-to-date and of a higher quality than other commercial maps, but 
this requires mappers to be actively cleaning the data.
In refugee contexts, having high quality data is even
For more details:
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Quality_assurancemore important as it can mean the difference between being able to access a service or not. It is 
also extremely important when dealing with personally identifiable or sensitive information - as OpenStreetMap is publicly available, not all data that is collected may be appropriate for upload. 
This process can ensure that only data meant for OpenStreetMap is uploaded.
While validation and quality control can be and should be performed at all stages of mapping, the 
main objective is to catch any mistakes in the data before uploading it or using it for any maps. 
As there are many different possible workflows for data collection, there is no one way to perform validation and quality control. There are several tools that assist with this process following field 
data collection as well as tools for monitoring data after upload. These tools help validators find 
and fix common issues such as misspelled or improperly formatted place names and incorrect tag usage.
There are many tools to help you achieve better quality OSM data. Some report bugs or errors, 
and some allow you to spot inaccurate changes and edits. Here we will go into more detail on Java 
OpenStreetMap, a great tool for editing OSM data. We will also introduce OSMCha which can help 
team managers monitor uploaded data for quality and monitor progress of data cleaning. 
One of the simplest ways to report errors is using the Notes      feature on the OpenStreetMap 
website. Just press the “Add a note to the map” button, and then you can let other mappers 
know about any mistakes or missing information.
Page 3009JOSM
Short Summary:
Skills and Technology 
Needed:JOSM (Java OpenStreetMap Editor) is an open 
source editor for OpenStreetMap data. JOSM 
allows you to create new data and edit existing 
data for OSM. To edit existing data in OSM, you 
will need to download data first with an internet 
connection. After downloading an area, users can 
work offline to edit data before re-uploading the 
data to OpenStreetMap.
While there are several ways to edit OpenStreetMap, JOSM 
allows users to work offline as well as make higher quantity 
and more detailed edits in a single sitting. While JOSM can be 
more intimidating to low-tech and new users, the program is 
best suited for field operations and areas where internet is 
unreliable.
We highly recommend that installation files for Java and JOSM 
are downloaded before operating in areas of low-internet 
accessibility if possible. These files can then be shared and 
installed offline.
As with iD editor, it is important to not to allow any information 
which could be potentially harmful to refugees be uploaded 
to OSM. For example, sensitive information about nationality, religion, or gender should not be uploaded into OSM.Computer
Installation files for JOSM & JavaInternet Connection (for download and upload)OSM AccountRecommended: computer mouse1. Open your Internet browser, and go to the 
installation websites for Java and JOSM
Java - https://java.com/en/download/
JOSM - https://josm.openstreetmap.de/
2. Once download and installation is complete, open 
JOSM. You will need to connect JOSM to your OSM 
account to enable data uploads. To do so, access 
the preferences window by clicking the ‘Edit’ menu 
and selecting ‘Preferences’. Click the       Connection Settings sub-menu, enter your OSM credentials 
(username and password) and select authenticate.
3. You can download data from OSM by clicking on the 
download button      and selecting an area of interest.
4. You can add aerial imagery as a background (if your 
internet connection is strong enough) by clicking on the ‘Imagery’ menu and selecting an option such as 
“Bing”.
5. Just like in iD Editor, you can add points, lines, and 
areas using the add node tool      . The difference is 
that these edits can be made while offline.
6. You can also use JOSM to edit GPS, field papers, or 
data collected in the field (i.e. ODK/OMK data) before 
uploading to OSM.
7. You should go through all data individually to check 
for spelling mistakes, incorrect tagging, and PII. To 
assist with the data cleaning process, you can use the validation tool, filters, and JOSM plug-ins including 
todo list.
8. When you’re done, you can either save your work 
for later upload or for review, or immediately upload 
changes to OSM by clicking on the upload      button.
9. Recommended: Have an experienced JOSM user 
serve as data quality manager, reviewing all data 
prior to upload.
For more details:
LearnOSM - Getting Started with JOSM:
https://learnosm.org/en/josm/start-josm/
JOSM Wiki Guide:
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/JOSM/Guide Key Steps for Setting up JOSM:
A feature-richeditor
Contextual Factors:Page 3110OSMCha
Short Summary:
Contextual Factors:Skills and Technology 
Needed:OSMCha, or the OpenStreetMap Changeset 
Analyzer, is a tool designed to review uploads and 
changes to OSM data, largely to prevent bad edits 
and vandalism to map data. This tool allows users 
to filter by username, location, dates of upload, 
and other metadata features. OSMCha is useful 
for monitoring the progress of data cleaning and 
upload teams. 
While errors and bad data should be caught 
prior to uploading to OSM, these mistakes 
happen. OSMCha allows managers to check the 
contributions of others for any missed errors and 
to provide feedback on their data quality checks. This feedback is especially important for mappers 
new to using JOSM so that mistakes are caught 
early and mappers can improve their quality 
assurance skills. OSMCha provides an additional 
opportunity to ensure no sensitive information is 
wrongly uploaded to OSM. Computer
Internet Connection1. Open your Internet browser, and go to
https://osmcha.mapbox.com/
2. Click on ‘Filters’ in the left-hand menu.3. Set a filter specific to your mapping project to sort 
data. Common filters for monitoring include setting:
a. Datesb. Comment c. Locationd. OSM Username
4. Click ‘Apply’.
5. OSM changes (or changesets) meet your filter 
requirements will appear in the left-hand menu. 
6. Click on any changeset to view it on the map as well 
as learn details such as data changes (added, modified, removed), user information, and any flags, or suspected errors, associated with the upload.
For more details:
OSMCha Guide - https://osmcha.mapbox.com/about
Mapbox: Using OSMCha for Inspecting Changes in OSM
https://github.com/mapbox/mapping/wiki/Using-
OSMCha-for-inspecting-changes-in-OpenStreetMapKey Steps for Viewing Changesets:Visualizing and
analyzing edits
Page 32MAP CREATION (DATA USE AND ANALYSIS)
Geospatial information collected or gathered in previous processes can help create maps that assist 
with resource management, operations, decision-making, advocacy, and communication. Examples 
of maps that might be useful include locations of services in a district, known WaSH facilities in a 
refugee camp, and average distance to educational facilities. 
As a participatory mapping process, it is crucial that final products are presented to and accessible by the 
community that participated in and facilitated the mapping. One of the best ways to do this is to present 
communities with maps in community centers, clinics, or other areas that are useful for refugees and host 
community members. 
There are several tools that can turn geospatial information into final map products, both static and dynamic. 
In most cases, geographic information system (GIS) programs are the most robust tool for analyzing, managing, 
displaying, and creating maps. In this toolkit, we’ll cover downloading data from OpenStreetMap using the 
HOT Export Tool, Humanitarian Data Exchange, and QGIS Plug-ins; QGIS for analyzing data and creating static 
maps; and Overpass Turbo for creating and displaying dynamic maps.
Static Maps
Dynamic MapsTraditional maps that are either printed or displayed digitally as image files. These maps can show specific topics (i.e. 
educational facilities, WaSH) and geographic focuses (i.e. camp, district). Static maps are best for displaying no more than a few topics, information that has temporal stability, and for users with low-access to technology and internet. 
Interactive, digital maps  allow users able to pan and zoom as well as change what information is displayed depending 
on preferences and functionality. Dynamic maps are best for displaying several types of information, information that is best viewed across different scales, and most importantly, for users with access to technology and strong internet.
Page 3311DOWNLOADING 
DATA
Different ways
to get the data
Contextual Factors:Key Steps for HDX:
Key Steps for QGIS Plug-ins
and QuickOSM:Short Summaries:
The Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) is a platform 
designed for humanitarian organizations and actors to easily share and use humanitarian data for analysis. The growing platform, managed by UN OCHA, contains datasets for over 200 countries and territories. Humanitarian OpenStreetMap data, such as buildings and roads, are regularly exported and uploaded to the database.
QGIS is an open source GIS program discussed in 
Section 13, and has several ways to download and use OpenStreetMap data in data analysis and map creation. Several plug-ins, such as QuickOSM, allow users to download OSM data by area and by specific tags or attributions.
The Export Tool is an online-based tool for downloading 
OSM data for use offline. It allows you to create customized extracts of up-to-date OSM data in various file formats. See Section 12 for more information about the Export Tool. 
The correct tool to use depends on what data you need and 
how you plan on using it. HDX allows users to download 
data outside of OSM data and non-geospatial data. The 
HOT Export Tool is useful for downloading specific data, 
such as matching a data model using YAML, and allows 
users to download OSM data for use in various geospatial 
applications. QuickOSM and other QGIS plug-ins are best 
for users working in QGIS with more general needs for OSM 
data.1. Open your internet browser and go to
https://data.humdata.org/
2. Start by searching for data around a key term or location 
(i.e. refugee, WaSH, Bangladesh) or click on ‘Data’ to browse 
through all existing datasets.
3. Each dataset will have a title, uploading organization (i.e 
UNHCR, Red Cross), upload date, dataset date, description, and available file types.
4. Once you’ve selected a dataset that you would like to 
download, click on the appropriate file type and begin the download process.
1. First, if you are unfamiliar with QGIS, read 
Section 13 - QGIS.
2. Open QGIS on your computer. 
3. To download the QGIS Plug-ins, you will need internet 
access.
4. Click on the ‘Plug-ins’ menu and select ‘Manage and 
Install Plug-ins’. 
5. Search for ‘QuickOSM’, click on the option in the menu 
and select ‘Install’. 
6. Once installed, to use the Quick OSM Plugin, go to the 
‘Vector' menu, open 'Quick OSM', select 'Dock’, and click 'Quick Query'.
7. Enter a key and value, such as ‘place’ and ‘town’ 
respectively.
8. Select an extent - either the extent of a map layer or 
extent of the map canvas. 
9. Click ‘Run Query’.
Note: if the query is unsuccessful and does not download 
data, it is likely that either there is an issue with the key/value or the extent is too large for the download capacity. Skills and Technology Needed:
Computer
Internet ConnectionOSM Account (HOT Export Tool only)
Page 34EXPORT
TOOL12
5.
6.
7.
8.
For more details:
Export Tool Guide
https://export.hotosm.org/en/v3/learn
LearnOSM
http://learnosm.org/en/osm-data/geofabrik-and-hot-export1.
2.
3.Key Steps for Downloading Data:
Go to the Export Tool (https://export.hotosm.org). 
Start by logging in using your OSM username and 
password, by clicking the red “Log In” button in 
the top right-hand corner. Then you will need to 
confirm your email address. 
After logging in, click “Create” or “Start Exporting” 
to begin working on your first export.
On the map to the right define your Area of Interest 
(AOI). You can do this by selecting the area you 
wish to export data from. You can search, draw a 
box or polygon around your AOI, or simply export 
everything you are currently viewing. You can also 
upload a GeoJSON file by pressing Import.
The size of an export is limited by the amount of data in your area of interest, too many features 
will cause our server to fail.4.On the left-hand side will be a number of tabs, use these to create the parameters of your export.
Describe Fill out a name and description of the 
project
Format Choose your GIS file format. Shapefile 
is the default option though Geopackage is 
becoming more commonly used and has certain 
advantages
Data Select which features you want to query 
and include in your download package
Summary Download your files by clicking 
“Create Export” - your export may take some 
time to run depending on the size of your area 
and how many feature types are in your query.
Download your file by clicking on the 
highlighted link, it should be the name of 
your project and the format you decided. This 
appears as a .zip in your computer’s downloads folder. (It will also automatically send a link to 
the file in your email.)
Import – Browse to your computer’s downloads 
folder, right click and “Cut” the .zip file. Browse 
to the location where you want to keep your 
files and paste. Right click .zip file and extract the file.
Using data 
If you downloaded shapefiles, common 
applications to work with the data are JOSM 
(which needs a plugin to import shapefiles) or
QGIS, which you then import via the Add 
Vector button. You should be able to view 
exported data within the map. See QGIS 
tool for more details. 
Now you have your data!
Short Summary: The Export Tool is an online-
based tool for downloading OSM data for use 
offline. It allows you to create customized extracts 
of up-to-date OSM data in various file formats.How to download the data
Tools and Technology Needed:
Computer
Internet Connection
OSM AccountPage 3513QGIS
Short Summary:
Contextual Factors:QGIS (or Quantum GIS) is a free and open source 
geographic information system (GIS) program. GIS programs allow users to display, manage, and analyze geospatial information on the computer, and create map products. Data that can be used in GIS includes aerial imagery, GPS data, and spatial datasets.  
QGIS allows for the transformation of data 
collected in the field into maps that can assist 
with field operations, resource distribution and 
management, and communications to name a few 
applications. As a free and open source program, 
QGIS allows organizations and users to create map 
products and analyze geospatial data without the 
heavy costs of proprietary programs.  Using: Any GIS file type can be used in QGIS (i.e. shapefiles, 
geoTIFF, geoJSON). Files can also be downloaded from the 
Humanitarian Data Exchange and OpenStreetMap using the HOT Export Tool or the QuickOSM plug-in in QGIS. 
Analyzing: Users can use QGIS to analyze data for 
particular needs such as finding water points within 
walking distance of camps or the density of educational facilities in target areas. Many plug-ins have been created to help users assist with analyzing geospatial data such as InaSAFE, which helps users assess, plan, and mitigate for disasters using GIS. 
Producing: Maps and atlases can be produced using the 
QGIS Print Composer.  Atlases allow for a large number of maps to be generated for areas of interest, such as districts, wards, and other administrative areas, with the same style and layout. An example of an atlas created in QGIS for the purpose of assessing flood risk can be found at: http://ramanihuria.org/data/Downloading: QGIS can be downloaded and installed 
offline using a previously downloaded installer or directly from the QGIS website (https://www.qgis.org). It is highly recommended to download software directly from the QGIS website whenever possible. This ensures that you have the most up-to-date version of the program. The QGIS file is larger than 300MB and may take a long time to download, depending on your internet connection.  
Plug-ins are tools created by QGIS users that extend the 
functionality of QGIS. These are downloaded from an online repository.Using the data to 
analyze & create maps
Tools and Technology Needed:
Computer with 
Windows, Mac, or Linux operating system
Sufficient free disk space (approx 10GB) and administrator rights to install software
Geospatial data 
(see Section 12 - Downloading Data)
Recommended: computer mouse
For more details:
QGIS Training Manual: 
https://docs.qgis.org/2.18/en/docs/training_manual/  
QGIS Tutorials:
https://www.qgistutorials.com/en/docs/learning_resources.
htmland-hot-exportPage 3614OVERPASS
TURBO
Short Summary:
Contextual Factors:Overpass Turbo is an online application that allows 
users to query, download, and visualize OpenStreetMap interactively. Some data can be difficult to represent in a static map due to distance, type of data, or the need to compare data at various scales. Overpass Turbo solves this issue by allowing users to query data and create a map that can be panned and zoomed to better communicate a dynamic context.
As Overpass Turbo requires strong internet 
connection to run queries and visualize data, it is 
less intended for field operations and better suited 
for presenting data and progress to partners, 
donors, and other stakeholders in situations that 
allow for internet connection. Querying and
Visualizing
Tools and Technology Needed:
Computer
Internet Connection
For more details:
Overpass Turbo Wiki: 
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_turbo Overpass Query Language Wiki: 
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API/Overpass_QL 
MapCSS Wiki or styling: 
https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_turbo/MapCSS  Key Steps for Overpass Turbo:
1. Open your Internet browser, and go to 
http://overpass-turbo.eu/ 
2. On the right-hand side is the map view. Locate your 
area of interest by zooming and panning or search for the area in the map search bar. This will be the bounding box for your query. 
3. On the left-hand side is the query builder. You can 
build a query manually using the query guides below, or use the Wizard tool in the top menu. 
4. When your query is built, click ‘Run’ in the top menu. 
This process will take time dependent on the amount of features in your query result. 
5. This query can then be exported as data files, maps, or 
as a standalone query. Click on ‘Export’ in the top menu. To download the query data, select ‘Data’ and the file type. To export as a map, select ‘Map’ and then select either a .png (image file) or interactive map.
6. The interactive map option creates an unique url that 
can be shared with other users to view and interact with the query that you generated, as well as embed into websites and other applications.
Another great free tool for visualizing is uMap, 
which lets you create online interactive maps 
with OpenStreetMap layers within a minute! 
https://umap.openstreetmap.fr/en Page 37PTP Refugee Camp was established to accommodate Ivoirians fleeing conflict in Côte d’Ivoire in 
early 2011. It is spread over 655 acres, and although many have been repatriated it is still home 
for thousands of refugees. 
Many of the previous structures in the camp have been torn down or are now empty. Thus, a 
major need for service providers was to have a more accurate picture of the camp’s status – 
especially as organizations were making plans for the future of the camp. 
HOT mobilized a team to collect data using ODK, and within a day and a half mapped water 
and sanitation points, service delivery points and existing structures. At the same time, they removed 1,600 structures that were no longer in existence. 
In a relatively short time, HOT was able to train staff with new tools and carried out a thorough 
mapping of the camp, effectively updating the picture with local knowledge. This is just one 
story from Liberia, where administrative boundaries and service delivery infrastructure was 
also mapped, allowing for a decentralization and assisting in governance and urban planning.
Tips:
To express gratitude, increase the likelihood of future participation in mapping activities, 
and maintain positive relationships, HOT recommends that participants are presented with 
a certificate of completion for training and field data collection. 
HOT also recommends identifying and securing permissions for strategic sites within an 
appropriate timeframe to maximize volunteer time for field mapping. Partners and local 
authorities should identify and secure resources for any potential security needs, such as high crime communities and market areas. 
When notifying citizens of an active project in their city or community, outreach strategy 
should also understand that not all residents listen to radio and rural areas require special 
attention or strategies for sensitization and communication.
Case Study:
Liberia - Field Mapping PTP Refugee CampPage 38Since 2013 over two million South Sudanese refugees have fled their borders, with over a million 
of those refugees seeking shelter in Northern Uganda. In both camp and non-camp settings, 
the region is host to farmers, cowherders, and other rural dwellers from South Sudan, most of 
them women and children, the men and boys often forced into conscription as they try to leave South Sudan. Refugees are provided for by multiple agencies, however, many do not know what 
the other is doing.
HOT trained refugees and host community members on mobile data collection tools such 
as OpenDataKit Collect to create an accurate map which addresses presence of WASH, 
Education, Health, and Cash-Based Intervention amenities in relation to both host and refugee communities in the district. The low-tech nature of ODK allows refugee mappers and host 
community mappers to often use their own mobile devices for data collection. 
By mapping the region, refugees and host community members are interacting and working 
alongside each other. Mappers are paired with community motorbike drivers (bodas) who 
provide hyper-local knowledge of the area and can translate for refugees outside of settlement areas. At the same time, boda drivers are encouraged to learn and participate in the mapping 
as they navigate the expansive camps and host communities. 
Not only are refugees and local community members involved in the data collection process, 
they are now seeing the results of their hard work. In Northern and Western Uganda, HOT 
has distributed maps of 117 (sub)counties to the communities that helped create these maps, ensuring they also benefit from their effort longer term. In many cases, this is the first time 
local councils have held an accurate, up-to-date map of their own county. 
Case Study: Northern Uganda
Local People, Local Tech, ‘just add knowledge’Page 39The Syrian conflict is one of the worst humanitarian crises of our time. One of the places Syrians 
have fled is Turkey, which has hosted more refugees than any other country in the world the 
last several years. With over 3.5 million refugees, 94% of them live outside of camps and they 
are a largely urban population. 
Such a large influx of people strained Turkey’s services, and the need for coherent and open data 
sets on these non-camp communities became clear early on. Refugees face many challenges adapting to a new culture, learning a new language, overcoming stereotypes and seeking work. 
At the same time, refugees have an incredible knowledge of the informal systems, facilities, 
and infrastructure that exists where they live. 
Therefore, HOT in partnership with a local Turkish organization worked with refugee communities 
to build base map data and create a comprehensive refugee-specific map that would lead to more effective navigation, service delivery, and response planning. The project collected over 
13,000 service points in several districts of Istanbul and used mapathons for digitization and 
Syrian field mappers for ODK data collection. 
Three big successes stand out. First, the project collected a substantial dataset in both Arabic 
and Turkish. Second, the team worked with local organizations to apply this information – for example, by creating a service map so Syrian parents can effectively register their newborns 
for temporary protection (providing domestic legal status from the Turkish government.) Third, 
workshops and events contributed to the understanding of open data and its humanitarian benefits - laying the groundwork for a strong OSM community and resulting in the establishment 
of the first Youth Mappers chapter of Turkey. 
 The project also faced serious challenges that should serve as lessons learned for organizations 
seeking to work in a developed, urban context. They are:
Highly developed countries are sometimes less inclined to work with OpenStreetMap data as they have pre-existing specific data sets, though they are often in closed systems.
Bureaucracy, either from the government or organizations can greatly inhibit potential 
collaboration and utilization of data.
Lack of empathy between the host and refugee community is a serious barrier to participatory 
mapping projects – political sensitivities can hinder data collection and its application. Case Study: Turkey
Building Istanbul’s Needs and Assistance 
Page 40Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework – Set out by 
the New York Declaration, the CRRF lays out a vision for a more predictable and comprehensive response to refugee crises. It calls for greater support to refugees and the countries that host them. At the heart of this approach is the idea that refugees should be included in the communities from the very beginning.
Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian Action - This 
handbook builds on existing guidelines to suggest how data protection principles should be applied by humanitarian organizations.
Humanitarian Icons - The United Nations Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian affairs (OCHA) has created a set of 500 freely available humanitarian icons to help relief workers present emergency and crisis-related information quickly and simply.
Humanitarian Principles - These four principles provide the 
foundations for humanitarian action, and govern the way humanitarian response is carried out. They are humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. 
Policy on the Protection of Personal Data (UNHCR) - This policy 
lays down the rules and principles relating to the processing of personal data of persons of concern to UNHCR.
PRM Principles for Refugee Protection in Urban Areas  - Core 
principles that guide the U.S. government’s response to the needs of refugees in urban areas. Drawing on best practice, the principles focus on diplomacy that seeks to ensure the status and legal rights of refugees, integration efforts, building self-reliance, and strengthening existing local structures. Protection Mainstreaming - The process of incorporating protection principles and promoting meaningful access, safety and dignity in humanitarian aid.
Sphere Handbook - A recognized set of common principles 
and universal minimum standards for humanitarian response.
The Grand Bargain - An agreement between donors and 
humanitarian organizations to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian action - aims to get more means into the hands of people in need. It commits organizations to providing 25 percent of humanitarian funding to local and national responders. 
The Humanitarian Charter - The cornerstone of the Sphere 
Handbook. It captures both the ethical and legal foundations of humanitarian action, and lays the ground for the Protection Principles, Core Standards and minimum standards.
UNHCR Alternatives to Camps - UNCHR’s policy is to pursue 
alternatives to camps, whenever possible, while ensuring that refugees are protected and assisted effectively and are able to achieve solutions. 
UNHCR Information Management Toolkit - This toolkit 
is structured to present UNHCR information and data management advice and tools meant to inform a coordinated humanitarian response during the first two to four months of a refugee emergency, but the guidance provided is relevant and useful in a broader range of operational settings.RESOURCES
Gift of the United States Government 
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration - US Department of State
