“Being on the wrong side of the
digital divide ”: seeking
technological interventions for
education in Northeast Nigeria
Marianne Martens, Lala Hajibayova and Kathleen Campana
School of Information, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA
Gretchen Caldwell Rinnert
School of Visual Communication Design, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA
Joanne Caniglia
College of Education Health and Human Services, Kent State University,
Kent, Ohio, USA
Isa Garba Bakori
American University of Nigeria, Yola, Nigeria
Tsukuru Kamiyama
Department of English, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA
Liman Audu Mohammed
American University of Nigeria, Yola, Nigeria, and
Davison M. Mupinga and Olivia Jeonghwa Oh
College of Education Health and Human Services, Kent State University,
Kent, Ohio, USA
Abstract
Purpose –This paper aims to report the initial findings of a project aiming to re-establish basic education in
conflict-ravaged states in Northeastern Nigeria and to improve education providers ’ability to plan and deliver
basic educational services. The authors present a preliminary analysis of Nigerian teachers ’access to
information communication technology (ICT), their technology skills, as well associated national ICT policies.
Design/methodology/approach –This case study uses results from two co-designed tools, administered
using KoboToolbox to Education Managers in the first instance, and teachers in the second. The data from the
tools form the basis for analysis.
Findings –In the first instance, educational managers reported a lack of access to technology, the internet and
to training and professional development. In the second instance, teachers reported issues present in the
classroom environment, including poor infrastructure, a lack of resources and over-crowded classrooms. Very
few teachers had access to computers or to the internet.
Research limitations/implications –The 33 educational managers represent a small sample size and may
not be fully representative of the region covered. The ICT Capacity Audit tool listed Excel in two different areas
–basic Excel skills and using Excel for data analysis –which could have caused confusion for participants. The
data collection should be repeated, expanded and compared for consistency. For the team, changes to the
proposed (SENSE) box content meant that we were not able to deliver low-tech tools, such as Boogie Boards, or
high-tech tools, such as tablets, to schools.
Originality/value –Despite seemingly insurmountable challenges, the research team identified low-tech tools
as a feasible resource in the classroom. Existing tools, such as teachers ’smartphones and use of the WhatsAppTechnological
interventions
for education
This work was supported by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID),
Cooperative Agreement #72062019CA00002, Addressing Education in Northeast Nigeria - Adamawaand Gombe States. We are grateful to our partners in Nigeria, especially the researchers who collecteddata on the ground and the study participants.The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/2050-3806.htm
Received 31 May 2020
Revised 14 August 2020
Accepted 14 October 2020
Aslib Journal of Information
Management
© Emerald Publishing Limited
2050-3806
DOI10.1108/AJIM-05-2020-0172application, can be used for sharing educational resources and providing teacher training. This paper argues
that Nigeria needs up-to-date national ICT policies to guide in-country efforts to develop implementation of
information technology initiatives for education.
Keywords Information communication technology for education (ICT4E), Technology skills, Nigeria, ICT4E
in Nigeria
Paper type Research Paper
Introduction
Information communication technology for education (ICT4E) has become one of the key
indicators of development and globalization as well as a staple of policies and strategies for
future advancement. Hawkridge (1990) identified four policy goals in relation to ICT4E in
developed countries established during its rise in the 1980s: (1) improve students ’computer
skills, (2) apply computer technologies in the instruction of traditional subjects, (3) transform
education through technology and (4) facilitate students ’computer competencies as
preparation for employment. Writing about Jordan, Hawkridge (1990) describes how using
technology in education results in economic benefits, as has been shown throughout the
world. In Jordan, the impact of globalization has shifted consideration of ICT4E toward its
potential economic benefits, such as training to create a technology-savvy population for the
information and communication technology (ICT) industry ( Kozma and Vota, 2014 ). The
stimulus of ICT in education in developing countries is often associated with the One Laptop
Per Child (OLPC) initiative ( Warschauer and Ames, 2010 ), which exploits laptop portability
and internet access to educate poor and remote students and develop their technology skills
to prepare them for the global knowledge economy ( Stratton et al., 2019 ).
There are many challenges in Sub-Saharan Africa with meeting the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4: “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all ”(United Nations, 2019 ). While access to technology
is of great interest, there are many competing i ssues. In Northeast Nigeria, researchers on an
education-focused proj ect observed problems with the infras tructure in schools. The Boko Haram
insurgency, which began in 2009, has left many b uildings in disrepair or partially destroyed.
Many schools lack basic sanitary facilities, runnin g water, have limited or inconsistent access to
electricity, no internet access, minimal classroo m furniture, old or damaged chalkboards and an
overall lack of classroom supplies. Furthermore, analysis of ICT4E i nitiatives raises questions
about their presumed impact on such aspects of learners ’development as critical thinking and
collaboration ( Evans and Popova, 2016 ;Zheng et al.,2 0 1 6 ).
Warschauer and Matuchniak (2010) suggest that the relationship between accessible
information communication technology and inequality involve complexities that will take far
more than the distribution of computers to address. The inequality or digital divide between
those who have access to and use of technologies and those who do not involve a wide
spectrum of issues and specificities, such as individuals ’ethnicity, demographics, education
as well as types of technology and its use ( van Dijk, 2005 ). In this vein, Gunkel (2003) states
that regardless of the numerous benefits that technology may bring, the idea that technology
will enable a whole new world of endless opportunities free from problematic sociocultural
aspects is simply utopic. Thus, digital inequality is a complex issue, which is linked to
existing social, economic and cultural divisions in society ( van Dijk, 2020 ). In this vein,
Aduwa-Ogiegbaen and Iyamu (2005) state categorically that “what is wrong with education
cannot be fixed with technology ”(p. 104). Along these lines, Stratton et al. (2019) , in their
analysis of the failures of ICT4E initiatives, distinguish first-order factors, i.e. basic
infrastructure affordances, such as electricity and internet connectivity, from second-order
factors, i.e. sociocultural, such as teaching practices rooted in teachers ’beliefs about teaching
and learning. They argue that addressing the first-order factors is necessary but notAJIMsufficient for successful ICT4E initiatives, and more attention to second-order factors is
required. However, as we found in our study, first-order factors must be improved before
second-order factors can be considered.
Avgerou (2010) identified two perspectives on ICT-enabled development: (1) the progressive
perspective, which considers ICT as an enabler of transformations in multiple domains of
human activities, and (2) the disruptive perspective, which premises on the highly political and
controversial nature of development and reveals conflicts of interest and struggles of power as
a necessary part of ICT innovation in developing countries. With regard to the successful
implementation of ICT4E initiatives, Stratton et al. (2019) argue that “national discourse and
materiality interact, and designers of initiatives need to be aware of the kinds of choices that
this interaction sets up for translating policy goals into teaching and learning practices and
outcomes ”(p. 20). Previously, Leonardi (2008) had emphasized that national discourse “may
have the power to shape the construction process by divesting the users of their agency to align
new technology with existing cultural practice ”(p. 980). Thus, Stratton et al. ’s (2019)
triangulation of ICT4E policies and teaching and learning practices and outcomes in Uruguay
and Bolivia found that in Uruguay, portability and connectivity were central ICT4E
components in a country ’s national discourse. This outcome resonated fully with the global
impetus for computers in education to prepare for a global knowledge economy. On the other
hand, in Bolivia, portability and connectivity were not required as the national discourse simply
favored computers in education to aid traditional pedagogies and content areas (p. 20).
This paper reports on an investigation into possible application of ICT4E in Nigeria
through the examination of related national ICT policies and implementation of a United
States Agency for International Development (USAID)-funded project. The initial goal of the
project is to re-establish basic education in conflict-ravaged states in Northeastern Nigeria
and improve education providers ’ability to plan and deliver basic educational services in line
with the policies of the state ’s education sector, including implementing technology.
Our project aims to address the acute educational needs resulting from disrupted access to
education in the conflict-ravaged states in Northeastern Nigeria while laying a foundation to re-
establish basic education and to improve teachers ’ability to plan and deliver basic educational
services. Specifically, the focus is on an ICT4E case in two states of Nigeria: Adamawa and
Gombe, through an examination of related ICT4E policies and educational managers ’
perceptions of accessibility of ICT as well as associated challenges. There is a specific reason
why we chose these two states. Initially, the team wanted to address the four Northeasternstates in Nigeria, including Borno, Adamawa, Yobe and Gombe states. However, the Boko
Haram insurgency, which has been on-going in the Northeast since 2009, made it too dangerous
for the research team to go to Borno and Yobe states. Risks of traveling in these areas include
poor transportation infrastructure, terrorism, kidnappings and armed attacks ( US Department
of State, 2020 ). Many internally displaced people (IDPs) have moved to Adamawa and Gombe
states, and because the lead partner is based in Adamawa, the decision was made to focus on
these two states. We present a preliminary analysis of Nigerian teachers ’access to ICT, their
technology skills, as well associated national ICT policies –and how these combine to impede
change. Based on this analysis, recommendations for second-order factors and low-tech
solutions that may catalyze educational projects in developing countries are proposed.
Background
In 2019, American University of Nigeria (AUN) and two US-based universities (Kent State
University and Columbia University ’s Center for Sustainable Development) received a nearly
US$14m USAID grant called Strengthening Education in Northeast Nigerian States (SENSE)
Activity. At the launch of the project, a primary goal of both the funding agency and the team
members was to get technology into classrooms in Northeast Nigeria, taking them from “no-Technological
interventions
for educationtech”to at least “low-tech ”environments. Part of this came from a desire to bring classrooms
to a level approaching what exists in the developed world. The project started with a baseline
scan of the environment in these classrooms. Over the next six months, the team worked first
to develop data collection tools that were subsequently deployed by the Nigerian team, then
visited Nigeria to collect more data via interviews, observations and co-design activities.
This paper addresses data gathered via KoboTools. All data gathered to date point to an
overall lack of resources in general, from damaged buildings to worn-out chalkboards, to a
lack of the most basic classroom materials, such as pencils and paper. During the initial six-
month period, USAID refocused the grant, and the emphasis changed from a focus on
technology to a focus on basic educational materials, including printed teacher guides and
pupil books. While the team had initially suggested creating classroom boxes filled with
teaching materials for each classroom, and library boxes (one per school) that would include
solar-powered tablets, the team instead recommended boxes with low-tech content, such as
radios and LCD eWriters, such as Boogie Boards, which have a seven-year battery.
Literature review
ICT4E initiatives in Nigeria began in the early 2000s when the Federal Ministry of Education
(MoE) launched a program to equip all schools in Nigeria with computers and other
communication technologies ( Adomi and Kpangban, 2010 ). In 2004, the Federal Government
of Nigeria adopted the National Policy on Education, which outlined the roadmap for
integration of ICT into secondary education in Nigeria, including the government ’s
commitment to providing basic infrastructure and training for schools. Nigeria ’s most recent
Ministry of Communication Technology Na tional Information and Communication
Technology Policy ( 2012) also emphasizes education as one of the key areas for adapting
information communication technologies, including the government ’s strategic plan to:
(1) Promote the incorporation of ICT within the education curriculum at all levels;(2) Introduce mandatory training and appropriate courses for ICT at all tiers of
education;
(3) Foster an ICT-driven educational administration environment;(4) Promote ICT awareness and proficiency in mass and non-formal education, with an
emphasis on children, youth, women and the physically challenged;
(5) Provide personal computers in public places (e.g. post offices, schools, public libraries,
etc.) in small and large communities to help low-income segments of society gain
access to the internet and for educational purposes; and
(6) Promote free and open-source software (FOSS) for development, education and
general use in the country (2012).
However, the implementation of these policies in Nigeria has been facing a number of
challenges and constraints because the policies overestimate the possibilities for the
materialization of limited resources and elicit unrealistic expectations. These challenges
include a lack of human resources (e.g. qualified teachers), adequate physical facilities (i.e.
wired classrooms and libraries, stable electricity and water supply), reliable data to facilitate
the effective implementation of educational plans, as well as the overall interplay of
government politics infused with wide-spread corruption ( Okoroma, 2006 ).Adomi and
Kpangban ’s (2010) analysis of factors influencing the adoption of ICTs in Nigerian secondary
schools in Edo and Delta states revealed that limited information infrastructure, a lack of ICT
facilities, frequent interruptions in electrical service and an overall absence of ways to
integrate such ICTs into the school curriculum, as well as overall poor policies and strategiesAJIMfor ICT implementation, were the main contributors to the low rate of ICT adoption and
application of technologies in Nigerian schools. Along these lines, Aduwa-Ogiegbaen and
Iyamu (2005) pointed out that obstacles preventing the use of ICT in secondary education in
Nigeria included the high cost of computer hardware and software, weak infrastructure, lack
of human skills in and knowledge about ICT and a lack of educationally relevant and
culturally appropriate software for Nigeria. They also observed that secondary schools in
Nigeria had not been given enough funds to provide adequate classrooms, furniture and
appropriate textbooks, let alone high-tech equipment, summing up with the conclusion that
“Nigeria is on the wrong side of the international digital divide as it has not made significant
effort to integrate ICT into secondary school curriculum ”(p. 104).
Distance and mobile learning are increasingly considered as an essential part of the
learning process ( Cabrol and Severin, 2010 ;Georgiev et al., 2004 ). According to Pew Research
Center ’s (2018) global attitudes survey, the increased internet connectivity in Sub-Saharan
Africa, including Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tanzania, is positively
correlated with such lifestyle outcomes as use of cell phones and associated overall use of the
internet (see also Poushter, 2016 ). According to The Economist , among social media
platforms, “WhatsApp, which has 1.5bn users globally, is especially influential in Africa ”
(The Economist, 2019 ) and is the most popular social media platform in Nigeria. The fact that
WhatsApp has a voice message option means that it can be used by people of low or no
literacy. The large majority of survey respondents also noted that increasing use of the
internet had a positive influence on education as well as the economy, personal relationships
and politics ( Silver and Johnson, 2018 ). However, Kolawole (2017) argues that an overall lack
of internet connectivity in Nigeria is responsible for the “digital marginalization ”that is still
subject to high concern (p. 154). Along these lines, Obgo et al. (2017) observed a large digital
divide between urban and rural cell phone users.
ICT4E initiatives are part of a larger ecosystem comprised of complex sociotechnical
relationships among people, institution s, resources (tangible and intangible) and
infrastructures. Thus, these relationships inevitably shape the success of ICT4E. Clark
and Mayer (2016) observed that throughout the history of educational technology, there have
been strong expectations and claims that the newest technology would revolutionize
education; yet, in each case, the potential was not reached. Clark and Mayer speculate that one
of the reasons for the disappointing history of educational technology could be the fact that
instructors expected learners to adapt to the technology and hardly considered theimportance of designing learning environments that would be consistent with how
individuals learn. Along these lines, Stratton et al. (2019) argue that the failure of ICT4E
initiatives is often associated with the role of the materiality of the underlying technologies
and infrastructure; yet, the greater influence of materiality in terms of interaction with higher-
level factors, such as a national discourse on ICT4E, is often understudied.
Through the lens of Nigerian ICT discourse, this study examines two aspects of
materiality upon which ICT4E initiatives are enacted, specifically, technology skills of
educators and connectivity. Along with the basic infrastructure, educators ’technology skills
and connectivity are two fundamental re quirements for shaping the successful
implementation of ICT4E. The lack of bas ic infrastructure and resources makes
implementation challenging in this region. Subsequently, this study also proposes a
framework for applying low-cost ICT solutions for education in Nigeria.
Theoretical framework
Numerous learning theories demonstrate that technology in the classroom enhances learning.
In learning environments, accessible technology such as mobile devices can meet immediate
needs. To support this, a learning theory that emerges is the socially shared cognition theoryTechnological
interventions
for education(SCT) ( Thompson and Fine, 1999 ). In SCT, learners are participants in a community in which
cognition is shared among the participants, the artifacts and tools they are using and the
social institutions in which the learning occurs ( Brown and Cole, 2000 ). In this situation,
teachers can receive professional development information via digital devices and share it
with their students and other teachers. Technology, in this case, helps to disseminate
knowledge through the learning community, making students active participants and
ultimately leading to cognition ( Bell and Winn, 2000 ).
Furthermore, technology in the classroom provides a means for authentic and active
learning, also known as student- or learner-centered learning ( Doak, 2009 ). During active
learning, the focus is on students ’efforts to construct their knowledge ( Carr et al.,2 0 1 5 ). The
constructivist learning theory emphasizes that individuals learn through building their own
knowledge, connecting new ideas and experiences to existing knowledge and experiences to
form new or enhanced understanding ( Bransford et al. , 1999 ). According to the social
constructivism theory, this learning happens “primarily through social interaction with others,
such as a teacher or a learner ’sp e e r s ”(Cambridge International, 2019 , p. 1), and technology can
facilitate this. The ultimate advantage of promoting active learning is that it “fosters students ’
learning and their autonomy, giving them greater involvement and control over their learning
and giving them skills of life-long learning ...and develop[ing] their metacognitive thinking ”
(Cambridge International, 2019 , p. 2). Therefore, the effective use of technology in the classroom
has the potential to allow students to interact with the learning process as they develop their
understanding. In support, Fouts (2000) observes that “because many new technologies are
interactive, it is now easier to create environments in which students can learn by doing, receive
feedback, and continually refine their understanding and build new knowledge ”(p. 11).
Through the shared knowledge, explained above, technology promotes constructivism,
which enables students to retain a deeper conceptual understanding of the content being
taught. Also, in situations where qualified teachers are neither available nor sufficiently
knowledgeable, instructional technology becomes the lifeline to students by providing the
needed content and pedagogy.
Yet, the successful implementation of ICTs in a learning environment is not simply
transferred across various sociotechnical systems. In this regard, Avgerou and Walsham
(2017) state that the organizational logic, work practices as well as cultural conditions
surrounding and enabling such technologies in their original context are often alien to the
recipient context. Leonardi (2011) points out that the routines and technologies are the
infrastructure or building blocks that the imbrication of human and material agencies (i.e. the
capacity for nonhuman entities to act on their own without human intervention) produce.
Leonardi (2011) further clarifies that by keeping a distinction between human and material
agencies, the imbrication metaphor differentiates the relationship between people and
technologies: “people have agency and technologies have agency, but ultimately, people
decide how they will respond to a technology ”(p. 151). From the imbrication lens, both
humans and material agencies are interwoven and necessary for changes in technologies and
in individual ’s interactions ( Leonardi, 2011 ).
From this vantage point, the interplay between various sociotechnical relationships, i.e.
individuals and their related skills, technologies, resources and policies, is key for the success
of ICT4E initiatives. Applying the sociotechnical approach and metaphor of imbrication, this
study aims to examine how ICT-related policies, infrastructure and human agents as well as
how their related skills contribute to shaping ICT4E initiatives in Nigeria.
Research question
At the beginning of the project, even as the team was writing the proposal for the grant, it was
clear that Northeastern Nigeria was in a state of educational crisis. Poverty and the BokoAJIMHaram insurgency had negatively impacted schools and education in general. According to
World Bank data, the literacy rate of all young people in Nigeria aged 15 –24 is about 68% for
females and 82% for males ( UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2018 ). These numbers change
drastically when only the Northeast is considered, resulting in an environment that reports
up to 80% illiteracy. In this region, many children, especially girls, are kept out of school for a
variety of reasons: e.g. families often need children (especially girls) to help with work around
the home; girls are often married early; or families are unable to provide even basic fees to
cover uniforms and books (which even government schools require). In addition, schools
frequently lack basic sanitary facilities, and classrooms are not inviting –many are
overcrowded, in a state of disrepair or completely destroyed. Given these challenges, this
paper investigated the following broad research question:
RQ1. What are the capacities of educational systems in Adamawa and Gombe states of
Nigeria to implement the Nigerian national ICT policies for education?
Methodology
A case study approach is being used with the broader study to understand the educational
needs in Adamawa and Gombe states. The case study methods include surveys, interviews,
focus groups, observations and co-design activities done with a variety of participant groups
that play a role in the educational systems in Northeast Nigeria. The case study approach was
chosen because according to Gerring (2004) , it can provide a good understanding of a causal
mechanism or interplay between general knowledge of the world with empirical knowledge
of how particular phenomena are interrelated.
However, to answer the research question guiding this more specific exploration of ICT4E
initiatives in Nigeria and how it informs the broader study, this paper reports on the data from
two tools that were administered as a part of the case study: (1) the ICT Capacity Audit
Questionnaire and (2) the Teacher Audit and Observation for Teaching and Learning Materials
(TLM) Tool. The ICT Capacity Audit Questionnaire consisted of 20 questions mainly focused
on the availability of ICT equipment and the ICT knowledge and skills of their staff. The
Teacher Audit and Observation for TLM Tool included both a questionnaire and a structured
observation component. The questionnaire portion consisted of 15 questions focused on
demographics, presence of and support for technology in the classroom and the challenges they
face. The observation portion looked at all aspects of the classroom, including the physical
environment, curriculum, resources and more. The initial development of the tools was done
collaboratively by all three universities during summer 2019. The tools were then refined by the
lead institution and loaded into KoBoToolbox to be administered on Android tablets in the field.
The team chose the open-source KoBoToolbox ( KoBo Toolbox at the Harvard Humanitarian
Initiative, n.d. ) as a data-gathering tool for this project, as it allows researchers to administer
surveys and questionnaires on Android phones or tablets in offline settings.
Participants
All subjects were recruited via purposive snowball sampling from schools participating in the
project. This process involved asking participants for recommendations of acquaintances
who might qualify for participation, leading to referral chains. Taking into consideration the
need for the knowledge insider to locate people for the study, this method was considered as
most suitable. The purposive snowball sampling resulted in the ICT Capacity Audit
Questionnaire being administered to 33 staff (22 from Adamawa state and 11 from Gombe
state) from the Department of Planning, Research and Statistics (DPRS) (which consists of the
DPRS, the Education Management Information Systems (EMIS) and the Department of
Quality Assurance (DQA) units) of the MoE and State Universal Basic Education BoardTechnological
interventions
for education(DPRS, EMIS, DQA units). The Teacher Audit and Observation for TLM Tool was
administered to 423 primary teachers from 69 schools, of which 42 schools were located in
Adamawa state and 27 schools were in Gombe state.
Data collection
Because many areas in Northeast Nigeria experience unreliable internet connection and
access to computers, tablets and mobile phones can be limited, the questionnaires and
observations were administered in-person by the lead institution ’s monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) team. These researchers traveled to the schools and the different educational offices
and administered the questionnaires verbally with the participants and recorded their
responses to each question on Android tablets using KoboToolbox. For the classroom
observations, the researcher added notes under each observation prompt in KoboToolbox
while on-site. When researchers returned to internet access, the data they had collected on-site
were uploaded to the cloud, where it was shared with the wider team. The tools were
implemented by the Nigerian team during fall 2019, according to the steps outlined below:
(1) August –September 2019: Development of KoboToolbox for data collection;
(2) The paper-based questionnaires were entered into KoboToolbox, deployed on the
KoboToolbox platform and subsequently downloaded to Android tablets in
preparation for data collection from respondents;
(3) September 2019: Training of researchers on both tools;
(4) The project M&E researchers were first given a half-day training on the tablets
equipped with both tools on the KoBoToolbox platform;
(5) September –October 2019: Administration of tools in Adamawa and Gombe states:
/C15Administration of ICT Capacity Audit questionnaires to 33 education managers
took place from September 28, 2019, to October 2, 2019.
/C15Administration of Teacher Audit and Observation for TLM to 423 primary 2,3,4and 5 literacy and numeracy teachers in 69 schools selected for the project took
place from September 15, 2019, to September 26, 2019.
(6) October 2019: Data uploaded to KoboToolbox.
Data from the tools were synched to the KoboToolbox platform. The data were then
downloaded for analysis.
While the lead institution conducted all of the data collection, many of the findings, such as
intermittent access to electricity in classrooms and lack of technology, were also observed
(and confirmed) in schools by the research teams from the other two universities during visits
to Northeastern Nigeria.
Analysis and results
The KoboToolbox data were exported to Excel, and answers were grouped thematically. The
first set of results below are from the ICT Capacity Audit, in which educational managers
revealed information about access to electricity, internet, the training required to get a job as
an educational manager and professional development. The data also included educational
managers ’descriptions of their own qualifications and work environments. The second set of
results describes teachers ’access to electricity, internet, technology and provides information
about the general state of classrooms while also including self-reported data from the
teachers on their qualifications, access to technology and classroom environments.AJIMTool #1: information and communication technology capacity audit
Electricity
In response to the question Do you have challenges related to the availability of electricity :1 6
education managers reported limitations on supply (of electricity), 15 reported frequent
outages and 13 said they have no back-up generators. Two reported “other ”problems related
to electricity but did not specify what those were. Further, in open-ended responses,
participants shared that inconsistent and insufficient electricity leads to problems with
productivity at work, such as the following:
(1) It causes distracted attention while working, and when the AC is on, some appliances
may not work due to limited power supply.
(2) Once our power goes off, all of our office work stops.(3) It causes delays in my work and can sometimes corrupt data on the computer and
affect time management.
Others said the lack of electricity (and subsequent lack of air conditioning) leads to lower
productivity and even health problems.
Internet access
Of the 33 education managers, 14 reported having a dedicated computer for storage and
retrieval of data, and 19 had none. Of those with computers, only two reported having access
to the internet. Despite the relative lack of access to technology and the overall lack of access
to the internet, Table 1 shows participants ’understanding of qualifications necessary for
their positions, and 12 of the participants reported that computer skills were a requirement
when they applied for their jobs.
Others reported different qualifications: five reported that post-primary education and a civil
service commission were required; six relate d that just the Civil Service Commission was
required; and ten said that “qualifications ”or“experience ”(neither of which were defined) were
necessary.
Qualifications
Participants perceived the ability to use technology as being important to their work.
Qualitative answers elaborating on the question: “describe the criteria for how staff are
posted to this unit, ”included the following:
(1) You must be computer literate.
(2) You must be computer literate and hardworking.(3) You need to have a certificate, diploma or degree in computer science.
Despite the fact that computer skills were a desirable qualification, respondents reported low
proficiency in basic Microsoft Office applications ( Table 2 ). Nearly half of the education
administrators reported having beginner-level skills in the use of the Microsoft Office
Qualifications required Participants ’responses n533
Computer skills and/or degree in computers 12
Post-primary education and civil service commission 5
Civil service commission 6
Based on qualification and/or experience 10Table 1.
Prior qualification
required for job
eligibilityTechnological
interventions
for educationPackage (including Word (13), Access (15), PowerPoint (14) and Publisher (12)). Participants
were asked about their knowledge with MS Excel twice: the first (MS Excel 1) asked about
their knowledge of basic Excel skills, and the second asked about their ability to use Excel for
statistical analysis. In total, 18 participants reported having beginner-level basic Excel skills.
Overall, respondents reported marginal skills in using data analysis software such as
SPSS, STATA, CSPRO and MS Excel, with most having either beginner-level skills or none at
all, but surprisingly, in answer to the question: “do you have the skills to analyze, interpret
and report associated educational data, ”20 participants reported that they did. An “other ”
category on the KoboToolbox questionnaire would have given us more information about
alternative tools that might be used locally to analyze data. Such tools might include analog
tools, such as calculators, or manual analysis, especially based on the issues with electricity
and a lack of computers reported herein. Future research could examine this further.
Professional development
The data revealed that there is a lack of professional development available for educational
managers. Only four participants indicated the availability of training in the analysis of
educational data for decision-making purposes.
The Teacher Audit and Observation Tool, which was administered to teachers in
Adamawa and Gombe states, provided answers to similar questions regarding the capacity
for technology in the classrooms. As shown below, most teachers face dire first-factor
problems, from overcrowding to a drastic lack of the most basic materials in the classroom.
The absence of technology is just one more piece in the overall dearth of resources.
Tool #2: Teacher Audit and Observation for Teaching and Learning Materials
The Teacher Audit and Observation for TLM tool was administered to 423 teachers, of which274 were located in Adamawa state and 176 were in Gombe state. Questions from the tool that
related to the capacity for adding technology to the curriculum included: (1) is there an
internet connection in the classroom; (2) is there technology in the classroom; (3) number of
students present. The observations helped to inform these same topics by including prompts
focused on the physical environment and the presence of resources.
Overcrowding
During the observations, researchers answered whether or not the classrooms looked
overcrowded and described classroom settings (e.g. materials available for the teacher and
students). A lack of infrastructure (i.e. buildings, classrooms) and teachers in the region has
led to widespread overpopulation in classrooms (by western educational standards).Level of proficiency None Beginner Intermediate Advanced Total
Applications
MS Word 3 13 13 4 33MS Excel –basic skills (1) 4 18 7 4 33
MS PowerPoint 8 14 9 2 33
MS Access 10 15 8 0 33MS Publisher 16 12 5 0 33SPSS 26 4 3 0 33STATA 27 4 2 0 33CSPRO 28 3 2 0 33
MS Excel –statistical analysis (2) 7 13 10 2 32
Epi Info 26 5 1 1 33Table 2.
Proficiency in using
Microsoft Office and
statistical applicationsAJIMThe average class size reported was 47 students. Variations of the overcrowded classroom
theme emerged in the observation notes:
(1) The classroom is overcrowded, and pupils are having to sit on the floor.(2) The children are all sitting on the floor, and the class is overcrowded.
Resources, including technology
The observation notes revealed a recurring theme of participants describing first-factor
issues of limited or no classroom resources, all of which would make it difficult if not
impossible, to add technology to the curriculum. Sample comments follow:
(1) The blackboard is in bad condition, as are standard chairs and benches. Writing
materials, such as chalk, is not available.
(2) There are no materials in the classroom.
(3) There is a lack of chairs and desks and a lack of teaching material. Children are not
properly dressed.
(4) There are no tables and desks. No infrastructure such as toilets. There is a lack of
clean water and electricity. There is no curriculum, and no learning materials for both
student and teacher. The classrooms are overcrowded and in very poor condition.
One teacher described a lack of technology simply as referring to a non-existent fan:
(1) Lack of electronic device, e.g. fan.
Two respondents reported evidence of material from other non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), such as UNICEF:
(1) There is a blackboard, two UNICEF calendars on sanitation and a waste bin and
benches.
(2) The class has been well renovated by UNICEF. There is a new bench and desk and a
new chalkboard.
Of all 423 respondents, only one teacher confirmed an internet connection in his or her
classroom, and only three reported that they had technology in their classrooms. In each case,
the numbers represent less than 1% of the classrooms included in the data collection. While
overcrowding and infrastructure challenges are arguably more critical than a lack of
technology in the classroom, there are spaces where the incorporation of technology could
ameliorate some of the deficiencies, especially in the areas of teaching and instructional
materials.
Discussion
Unfortunately, the preliminary findings of this project do not demonstrate significant
development of ICT4E in the Nigerian states of Adamawa and Gombe, since the early 2000s.
While this case study is based on data from states that are currently among the most
vulnerable to political unrest, our initial findings demonstrate a disconnect between national
ICT policy and local realities. It appears that policies at the national level are not trickling
down to the local level, and as shown herein, in remote states in the Northeast, there is
virtually no support provided for the training and infrastructure building that is necessary to
create and sustain a technology-driven educational environment. Our findings reveal a vague
and outdated national discourse on ICT policies, combined with a severe lack of first-orderTechnological
interventions
for educationfactors, which prompts the question of which ICT4E solutions could be applicable to the
Northeast Nigerian context.
In line with earlier studies (e.g. Okoroma, 2006 ), there are persistent challenges to the
application of ICTs to education in Nigeria, including inadequate supply of electricity, scarce
internet access, infrastructure issues and a need for overall technology training and
professional development.
This study echoes Aduwa-Ogiegbaen and Iyamu ’s (2005) study, in which they identified
obstacles that prevent the use of ICT in Nigeria, i.e. weak infrastructure, lack of human skills
in and knowledge about ICT, inadequate funds to provide furniture, appropriate textbooks
and adequate classrooms, let alone high-tech equipment. Unfortunately, Aduwa-Ogiegbaen
and Iyamu ’s (2005) conclusion that “Nigeria is on the wrong side of the international digital
divide as it has not made significant effort to integrate ICT into secondary school curriculum ”
(p. 104) still rings relevant today.
Based on these preliminary findings, it may be argued that building the human and
technology capacity to effectively implement ICT4E is crucial to achieving much-needed
educational progress in Nigeria. In particular, the following actions might facilitate this
process at the national level:
(1) Collaborate at a grassroots-level with leaders in local education systems to facilitate
the development of realistic and well-defined national ICT4E policies;
(2) Define benchmarks and/or indicators to assess capacity and evaluate future
development of ICT4E;
(3) Develop the capacity to attract, absorb and manage resources to facilitate effective
ICT4E projects; and
(4) Build the human capacity to strengthen the education system.
On a local level, identifying human agents, institutions and solutions that can be mobilized
could help to advance ICT4E initiatives in a programmatic and targeted fashion. For
example, a growing number of teachers and education managers have smartphones and use
WhatsApp to communicate ( Madge et al. , 2019 ). Using WhatsApp, educational managers
could identify and share material that could be transmitted via this tool, such as training
videos or course content housed in an organized digital repository. There might also be steps
to ease the teachers ’burden to cover fees associated with the use of their personal devices.
Whether or not the team ’s proposed low-tech tools are funded by the grant, creative and
resourceful solutions are needed.
Another low-cost ICT solution could be the development of educational telecenters and
radio stations to enhance access to quality educational resources. Echoing Obayelu and
Ogunlade (2006) , this paper argues that new ICT initiatives and opportunities for education
are key in the process of self-determination, economic, social and cultural advancement as
well as employment beyond the scope of traditional institutions and any forms of governance.
Limitations and future research
There are many limitations to the initial data presented here. First of all, the 33 educational
managers represent a small sample size and may not be fully representative of the region
covered. The ICT Capacity Audit tool listed Excel in two different areas –basic Excel skills
and using Excel for data analysis –which could have caused confusion for participants. The
tools asked questions about their skills with the Microsoft Office Applications, but not about
open-source applications, such as those available under G Suite ( Google LLC, 2020 ). The data
collection should be repeated, expanded and compared for consistency. For the team, changesAJIMto the proposed SENSE box content meant that we were not able to deliver low-tech tools,
such as Boogie Boards, or high-tech tools, such as tablets, to schools. Instead, a future study
might pilot existing tools, such as the WhatsApp application, as a tool for professional
development and educational content delivery.
Conclusion
Despite the fact that the Nigerian Federal MoE launched a program in the early 2000s to equip
all schools in Nigeria with computers and ICTs as described above, and a USAID grant to
improve educational outcomes initially focused on including some tech solutions for Nigerian
classrooms, the situation in Northeast Nigeria complicates bringing technology to the
schools. While research shows that low-tech or high-tech tools can support educational
efforts, and our findings reveal that education managers and teachers are hopeful for change,
an overall lack of resources makes it difficult to justify the addition of technology. Despite
this, when the team visited educational managers and teachers in Nigeria, many were
observed having personal cell phones. With the reported popularity of WhatsApp application
as an informal platform for learning ( Mpungose, 2020 ) and the expansion of the WhatsApp
application in Northeastern Nigeria (as described above), it seems that WhatsApp would be a
relatively accessible tool for content delivery for both educators and learners. Moreover,
Mpungose (2020) argues that WhatsApp may help students to socialize with the learning
activities and bring them into their informal experience collaboratively to undergo
assessment as learning. Just as mobile phone penetration has expanded rapidly in the
Northeast, it is anticipated that internet access will grow quickly as well. And, while this does
not help the issues with infrastructure, it could help increase access to educational content
and professional development.
Having technologies and routines as building blocks imbricating the human and material
agencies ( Leonardi, 2011 ), understanding the human agents ’response or adaption of a
technology is vital for the success of ICT4E. Through this understanding of how the features,
functionality or affordances of technologies are activated in the context of its use may enable a
vision of how technologies as well associated practices and policies could improve individuals ’
education and lives at large. In line with previous studies (e.g. Avgerou and Walsham, 2017 ;
Leonardi, 2011 ), this paper urges the consideration of ICT4E in the context of the socio-technical
ecosystem, including, but not limited to, infrastructure, institutions, policies and, most
importantly, skilled human agents to ensure the success of ICT4E initiatives in Nigeria.
References
Adomi, E.E. and Kpangban, E. (2010), “Application of ICTs in Nigerian secondary schools ”, Library
Philosophy and Practice, pp. 1-8, available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi510.1.1.600.663&rep 5rep1&type 5pdf(accessed 20 May 2020).
Aduwa-Ogiegbaen, S.E. and Iyamu, E.O.S. (2005), “Using information and communication technology
in secondary schools in Nigeria: problems and prospects ”,Journal of Educational Technology
and Society , Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 104-112, available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi 510.1.1.117.357&rep 5rep1&type 5pdf#page 5109(accessed 20 May 2020).
Avgerou, C. (2010), “Discourse on ICT and development ”,Information Technologies and International
Development , Vol. 3, pp. 1-18.
Avgerou, C. and Walsham, G. (2017), Information Technology in Context: Studies from the Perspective
of Developing Countries , Routledge, London.
Bell, P. and Winn, W. (2000), “Distributed cognitions, by nature and by design ”, in Jonassen, D.H. and
Land, S.M. (Eds), Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments , Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 123-145.Technological
interventions
for educationBransford, J.D., Brown, A.L. and Cocking, R.R. (1999), How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and
School , National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Brown, K. and Cole, M. (2000), “Socially shared cognition: system design and the organization of
collaborative research ”, in Jonassen, D.H. and Land, S.M. (Eds), Theoretical Foundations of
Learning Environments , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 197-214.
Cabrol, M. and Severin, E. (2010), “ICT to improve quality in education —a conceptual framework and
indicators in the use of information communication technology for education (ICT4E) ”,i n
Scheuermann, F. and Pedro, F. (Eds), Indicators, Criteria, and Benchmarks for International
Comparisons , European Union/OECD, Luxembourg, pp. 83-106.
Cambridge Assessment International Education (2019), “Active learning ”, available at: https://www.
cambridgeinternational.org/Images/271174-active-learning.pdf (accessed 20 May 2020).
Carr, R., Palmer, S. and Hagel, P. (2015), “Active learning: the importance of developing a
comprehensive measure ”,Active Learning in Higher Education , Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 173-186,
doi:10.1177/1469787415589529 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Clark, R.C. and Mayer, R.E. (2016), E-learning and the Science of Instruction: Proven Guidelines for
Consumers and Designers of Multimedia Learning , John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Doak, S. (2009), “Emerging theories of learning and the role of technology ”, Theories of Educational
Technology, available at: https://sites.google.com/a/bois estate.edu/edtechtheories/Home/
emerging-theories-of-learning-and-the-role-of-technology (accessed 20 May 2020).
Evans, D.K. and Popova, A. (2016), “What really works to improve learning in developing countries?
An analysis of divergent findings in systematic reviews ”,The World Bank Research Observer ,
Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 242-270, available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
516191468172488103/pdf/WPS7203.pdf (accessed 20 May 2020).
Fouts, J.T. (2000), “Research on computers and education: past, present and future ”, Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi 510.1.1.99.
7050&rep 5rep1&type 5pdf(accessed 20 May 2020).
Google LLC (2020), G Suite, available at: https://gsuite.google.com (accessed 20 October 2020).
Georgiev, T., Georgieva, E. and Smrikarov, A. (2004), “M-learning-a new stage of Е-learning ”,
International Conference on Computer Systems and Technologies, CompSysTech , 2004, available
at:https://www.researchgate.net/profile/T svetozar_Georgiev2/publication/262367952_M-
learning-a_new_stage_of_e-lea rning/links/00b495151514d5274b000000.pdf (accessed 10
August 2020).
Gerring, J. (2004), “What is a case study and what is it good for? ”,American Political Science Review ,
Vol. 98 No. 2, pp. 341-354, doi: 10.1017/S0003055404001182 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Gunkel, D.J. (2003), “Second thoughts: toward a critique of the digital divide ”,New Media and Society ,
Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 499-522.
Hawkridge, D. (1990), “Who needs computers in schools, and why? ”,Computers and Education , Vol. 15
Nos 1 –3, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1016/0360-1315(90)90121-M (accessed 20 May 2020).
KoBo Toolbox at the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, (n.d.), KoBo Toolbox, available at: https://
www.kobotoolbox.org/ (accessed 20 October 2020).
Kolawole, M. (2017), “Internet access in Nigeria: mobile phones, issues, and millennials ”,Africology:
Journal of Pan African Studies , Vol. 10 No. 10, pp. 153-163, available at: https://pdfs.
semanticscholar.org/ccda/2586eff1d201ec2f50342a44c11298c13b05.pdf?_ga 52.196249391.
2081283193.1580706834-477274453.1579225530 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Kozma, R.B. and Vota, W.S. (2014), “ICT in developing countries: policies, implementation, and
impact ”, in Spector, J., Merrill, M., Elen, J. and Bishop, M. (Eds), Handbook of Research on
Educational Communications and Technology , Springer, New York, NY, pp. 885-894, doi: 10.
1007/978-1-4614-3185-5_72 .
Leonardi, P.M. (2008), “Indeterminacy and the discourse of inevitability in international technology
management ”,Academy of Management Review , Vol. 33 No. 4, pp. 975-984.AJIMLeonardi, P.M. (2011), “When flexible routines meet flexible technologies: affordances, constraint, and
the imbrication of human and material agencies ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 147-167.
Madge, C., Breines, M.R., Dalu, M.T.B., Gunter, A., Mittelmeier, J., Prinsloo, P. and Raghuram, P. (2019),
“WhatsApp use among African international distance education (IDE) students: transferring,
translating and transforming educational experiences ”,Learning, Media and Technology ,
Vol. 44 No. 3, pp. 267-282.
Mpungose, C.B. (2020), “Is Moodle or WhatsApp the preferred e-learning platform at a South African
university? First-year students ’experiences ”,Education and Information Technologies , Vol. 25
No. 4, pp. 927-941.
Obayelu, A. and Ogunlade, I. (2006), “Analysis of the uses of information communication technology
(ICT) for gender empowerment and sustainable poverty alleviation in Nigeria ”,International
Journal of Education and Development using ICT , Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 45-69.
Obgo, E., Brown, T. and Sicker, D. (2017), “Understanding mobile service substitution and the urban-
rural digital divide in Nigeria ”, doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2944367 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Okoroma, N.S. (2006), “Educational policies and problems of implementation in Nigeria ”,Australian
Journal of Adult Learning , Vol. 46 No. 2, available at: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ797605.
pdf(accessed 20 May 2020).
Pew Research Center: Global Attitudes and Trends (2018), “Internet use is growing across much of
sub-Saharan Africa, but most are still offline ”, available at https://www.pewresearch.org/global/
2018/10/09/internet-use-is-growing-across-much-of-sub-saharan-africa-but-most-are-still-offline/(accessed 20 May 2020).
Poushter, J. (2016), “Smartphone ownership and Internet usage continues to climb in emerging
economies: but advanced economies still have higher rates of technology use ”, available at
https://www.pewresearch.org/ global/2016/02/22/smartphone-own ership-and-internet-usage-
continues-to-climb-in-emerging-economies/ (accessed 20 May 2020).
Silver, L. and Johnson, C. (2018), “Internet connectivity seen as having positive impact on life in Sub-
Saharan Africa: but digital divides persist ”, available at https://www.pewresearch.org/global/
2018/10/09/internet-connectivit y-seen-as-having-positive-impact -on-life-in-sub-saharan-africa/
(accessed 20 May 2020).
Stratton, C., Bailey, D.E. and Leonardi, P.M. (2019), “Translating national discourse into teaching and
learning outcomes: portability and connectivity in developing countries ’ICT in education
(ICT4E) initiatives ”,New Media and Society , Vol. 22 No. 12, doi: 10.1177/1461444819884373
(accessed 20 May 2020).
The Economist (2019), “
How WhatsApp is used and misused in Africa: the continent ’s most popular
messaging platform ”, 18 July, available at: https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/
2019/07/18/how-whatsapp-is-used-and-misused-in-africa (accessed 20 May 2020).
The Ministry of Communication Technology (2012), “National information and communication
technology (ICT) policy ”, available at: https://nitda.gov.ng/wp -content/uploads/2018/07/
National-ICT-Policy1.pdf (accessed 20 May 2020).
Thompson, L. and Fine, G.A. (1999), “Socially shared cognition, affect, and behavior: a review and
integration ”,Personality and Social Psychology Review , Vol. 3 No. 4, pp. 278-302, doi: 10.1207/
s15327957pspr0304_1 .
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2018), “Literacy rate data set –discharges (females ages) ”,1 5t o2 4
(data set), available at: https://data.worldbank.org/ind icator/SE.ADT.1524.LT.FE.ZS?
locations 5NG(accessed 20 May 2020).
United Nations (2019), “Sustainable development goal #4 ”, available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/sdg4 (accessed 20 May 2020).
United States Department of State (2020), “Nigeria travel advisory ”, available at: https://travel.state.
gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/traveladvisories/nigeria-travel-advisory.html (accessed
13 August 2020).Technological
interventions
for educationvan Dijk, J.A.G.M. (2005), The Deepening Divide: Inequality in the Information Society , Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
van Dijk, J. (2020), The Digital Divide , Polity Press, Medford, MA.
Warschauer, M. and Ames, M. (2010), “Can one laptop per child save the world ’s poor? ”,Journal of
International Affairs , Vol. 64 No. 1, pp. 33-51, available at: www.jstor.org/stable/24385184
(accessed 20 May 2020).
Warschauer, M. and Matuchniak, T. (2010), “New technology and digital worlds: analyzing evidence
of equity in access, use, and outcomes ”,Review of Research in Education , Vol. 34, pp. 179-225,
doi:10.3102/0091732X09349791 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Zheng, B., Warschauer, M., Lin, C.-H. and Chang, C. (2016), “Learning in one-to-one laptop
environments: a meta-analysis and research synthesis ”,Review of Educational Research , Vol. 86
No. 4, pp. 1052-1084, doi: 10.3102/0034654316628645 (accessed 20 May 2020).
Corresponding author
Marianne Martens can be contacted at: mmarten3@kent.edu
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comAJIM