 
WIDER BACKGROUND NOTE | 4/2020 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Artificial intelligence v ersus  COVID -19 in 
developing countries  
Priorities and trade -offs 
 
 
Wim Naudé * 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2020 
 
   
*Visiting Professor, RWTH Aachen University ; naude@time.rwth -aachen.de  
This study has been prepared within the UNU -WIDER project  on Academic Excellence.  
Copyright  ©  UNU -WIDER 20 20 / Licensed under CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO 
Information and requests: publications@wider.unu.edu 
https://doi.org/10.35188/UNU- WIDER/WBN/2020 -4  
United Nations University World Institute for Development  
Economics Research  
Katajanokanlaituri 6 B, 00160 Helsinki, Finland  
The United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics Research provides economic analysis and 
policy advice with the aim of promoting sustainable and equitable development. The Institute began operations in 1985 
in Helsinki, Finland, as the first research and training centre of the Unite d Nations University. Today it is a unique blend 
of think tank, research institute, and UN agency —providing a range of services from policy advice to governments as 
well as freely available original research.  
The Institute is funded through income from an endowment fund with additional contributions to its work programme 
from Finland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom as well as earmarked contributions for specific projects from a variety of 
donors.  
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s),  and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Institute or 
the United Nations University, nor the programme/project donors.  
Abstract:  Artificial i ntelligence  (AI) is a potentially powerful tool to reduc e the health and 
economic impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic. This note surveys the promise of AI, noting 
however that it faces certain limitations, particularly for making diagnoses and predicting the 
spread of the infection. The reason is insufficient data.  It may be more useful in helping to find a 
vaccine and treatments, and for social control. Both of these come , however, with pitfalls: one is 
that if countries at the cutting edge of AI research do find a vaccine, they may stockpile these. A 
second is tha t social control measures, for instance through contact -tracing apps, will violate data 
privacy , and moreover that these intrusive surveillance tools may be misused.   
Key words:  artificial intelligence, COVID -19, developing countries, global impact  
JEL classification:  I19, O20, O32, O39  
 
 
 
 
  
1 In this note , I will refer to current  efforts to harness a rtificial i ntelligence (AI) in the push back 
against COVID- 19, note its promises, limitations, potential pitfalls, and identify priorities for 
developing countries. Artificial Intelligence is the use of algorithms, data, and statistics to teach 
computers to recognize patterns and predict outcomes. Pa ttern recognition and prediction are 
what underlies machine learning  (ML), natural language processing  (NLP), and computer vision, 
the main applications of modern AI.  
The promise of AI v ersus  COVID -19  
Since the outbreak of the pandemic in December 2019, t here has been a  rush to harness  AI in 
the fight . AI can help track and predict the spread of the infection, it can help make  diagnoses 
and prognoses , and it  can search for treatments and a vaccine . It can also be used for social 
control —for  instance, to help isolate those that are infected and monitor and enforce 
compliance with lockdown measures . I document these efforts in an IZA Discussion Paper . 
Limitations  
Unfortunately, AI is currently not up to the job to track and predict the infection. It cannot yet 
provide reliable assistance in diagnoses. And , while its most promising use is to search for a 
vaccine and treatments, these will take a long time. The main reason for this somewhat 
pessimistic conclusion is inadequate  data. The problem in the current crisis is that t here is, on the 
one hand, not suitable enough (that is, unbiased and sufficient) data to train AI models to predict 
and diagnose COVID -19. Most of the studies that have trained AI models to diagnose COVID -
19 from CT scans or X -rays have made use of small, biased , and unrepresentative samples from 
China. Many of these studies are not (yet) published in peer -reviewed journals.  
On the other hand, the global impact and focus on the pandemic have resulted in too much data. 
There is too much noisy social media data associated with COVID -19, which the failure of 
Google Flu Trends  illustrated more than five years ago . This failure is dissected by Lazer  and 
colleagues  in a 2014 paper in  Science , in which they identified noisy social media data as upending 
‘big data hubris and algorithm dynamics ’. These factors currently also bedevil efforts to track 
COVID -19 using big data from social media.  
Furthermore, and perhaps more importantly, the systemic shock which the outbreak has caused 
has led to a deluge of outlier data. In essence, COVID -19 is a mas sive unique event. This sudden 
deluge of new data is invalidating almost all prediction models  in economics, finance, and 
business. The consequence  is that ‘many industries are going to be pulling the humans back into 
the forecasting chair that had been taken from them by the models ’. 
Surveillance  
So, while we will not likely see AI in prediction and diagnoses during the current pandemic, we 
are likely to see the growing use of it  for social control. In contrast to AI ’s limitations in 
prediction and diagnoses due to data problems, no such problems e xist in using surveillance 
technology. The use of mass surveillance to enforce lockdown and isolation measures in China, 
including infra -red cameras to identify potentially infected persons in public, has been well 
documented. These have not been limited to China, but are being adopted by many democracies, 
including  Australia, Germany, South Korea, Spain, the UK and USA. Here, it is not so much 
public infra -red cameras that are used , but rather , contact -tracing apps using personal mobile 
phone data.   
2 Many developing economies are following suit. OneZero  has compiled a list of at least 25 countries 
that by mid -April 2020 had resorted to surveillance technologies to track compliance and enforce 
social distancing measures. Many of these violate data privacy norms. These include developing 
countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Pakistan, Peru, 
Russia, South Africa, and Thailand. In the case of  South Africa , the country is reported  to have 
contracted a Singapore -based AI company to implement a ‘ real-time contact tracing and 
communication system ’. Singapore is using ‘ TraceTogethe r’, an app which sends out warnings if  
social distancing  limits are breached .  
In addition to social control and compliance measuring, AI systems via apps and mobile devices 
can also help  health authorities to manage provision of care. According  to Petropoulos , these  can 
‘Enable patients to  receive  real-time waiting -time information  from  their medical  providers,  to 
provide  people  with advice  and updat es about  their medical condition without them having to 
visit a hospital in person, and to notify individuals of potential infection hotspots in real -time so 
those areas can be  avoided.’  
Social control, and the public information that can be disseminated  via mobile devices, can be 
beneficial so long as we do not have a vaccine against the virus causing COVID -19. Without a 
vaccine, governments are left to ‘ flatten ’ the epidemiological  curve, to prevent  healthcare systems  
from being  overwhelmed by a sudden increase in patients. And while lockdowns and social 
distancing measures can be effective  to reduce the speed at which the virus spread s, they come at 
an exorbitant economic cost  and, therefore, at some time, must  be phased out  in favour of 
smarter, less blunt policy instruments .   
To limit the danger that there will be a rebound in infections once restrictions are lifted, it may 
be necessary for large -scale diagnostic testing  to identify those still infected and keep them in 
quarantine. In this approach, AI surveillance tools can be valuable . Large -scale diagnostic testing 
is also necessary to fill in the data gap that characterizes knowledge on the extent and fatality of 
the coronavirus. At the time of writing i t is not known  accurately how many people are in fact 
infected and how many are asymptomatic. A study in Science  suggested that up to 86 per  cent of 
all infections may be  undocumented. If this is accurate, then there are two important 
implications —one being bad news and the other one being good news. One, the pandemic may 
easily rebound once lockdowns are lifted. Two, the virus may not be as lethal as is thought. In this 
regard, The Economist  points out, ‘ If millions of people were infected weeks ago without dying, the 
virus must be less deadly than official data suggest .’  
The contribution of surveillance technology comes with one substantial risk , namely mission 
creep : that once the outbreak is over, that erosion of data privacy would not be reversed,  and 
that governments would continue to keep intrusive tabs on their populations . They can even 
potentially  use the data obtained in the fight against COVID -19 for other , nefarious,  purposes.    
Pitfalls  
This risk of using AI in the fight against COVID -19 is perhaps reflective of the general risk in 
using AI. AI has  both positive and negative impacts. There will always be trade -offs. For 
instance, if we consider the  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) broadly, a recent survey 
published in Nature Communications  emphasized that ‘AI can enable the accomplishment of 134 
targets across all the goals, but it may also inhibit 59 targets ’. AI can do good, but it can also do 
bad.  
Take two more examples of how AI can do both good and bad at the same time. While NLP 
algorithms may warn against  the possible outbreak of an epidemic by mining written repor ts on  
3 social media and online news, a  recent study  found that to train a standard NLP model to do this 
using g raphics processing unit ( GPU ) hardware, emits 626,155 pounds of CO 2. This is  five times 
more than an average car emits in its lifetime  (120,000 lbs) . Another example is that AI -driven 
automation may raise productivity and firm efficiency, but may increase unemployment  and 
poor-quality jobs ( ‘gigs’), with higher poverty and inequality as outcomes.   
Hence , the authors in Nature Communications  recommend that ‘ the fast development of AI needs 
to be supported by the necessary regulatory insight and oversight for AI -based technologies to 
enable sustainable develo pment. Failure to do so could result in gaps in transparency, safety, and 
ethical standards ’.  
The key point is that we need to limit the potential adverse consequences of AI, and we 
need to do so through adequate governance of AI.  
Having  identified curren t efforts to harness AI against COVID- 19, and having noted their 
promises, limitations, and potential pitfalls, it remains to identify the priorities for developing 
countries.  
Priorities  
Developing countries are already having to deal with the economic fallout of the pandemic. As 
Hausmann argues, with revenues, trade, and investments dropping, developing countries would 
need to increase their indebtedness massively if they are to implement basic healthcare support 
and social distancing m easures against the disease. They are losing policy space precisely when 
they need it the most. Therefore, prioritization of resources is vital.  
Developing countries should prioritize their scarce resources on propping up their health sectors 
and providing  social security to their citizens. In essence, they should not be investing their 
resources in AI in the hope of improving hospital efficiencies, or in finding a vaccine.  
Although AI can be helpful in finding a vaccine, developing countries, and particula rly those in 
Africa, are largely lagging in terms of AI research and development capability. As I document 
elsewhere , around 30 companies in three regions —North America, the EU, and China —
perform the vast bulk of research, patenting,1 and receipt of venture capital funding2 for AI.  
This is not to say that developing countries have no interest in harnessing AI to find a vaccine —
they do, because it can be argued that such a vaccine is a global public good.  Scott Barret  has put 
forth the concept of a ‘ single -best effort public good’ , which can be applied to the search for a 
vaccine for COVID -19. In the case of a ‘ single -best effort public good’ , it can be produced by 
one or a few countries for t he benefit of all countries. The requirement however is that the 
resulting vaccine be available in a non -excludable and nonrival manner . Thus, while developing 
countries should not be spending resources on finding pharmaceutical solutions to the crisis 
through AI, they should be part of a global coalition to harness the AI capabilities of high-
income economies and China in this respect. What should be avoided is an unco- ordinated 
response, an ‘AI arms race ’, if you will, between countries and regions, and u ncertainty about the 
distribution of and access to such a vaccine.  With the possibility that rich countries may hoard 
vaccines, there should be clear and fair protocols for the distribution of and access to such a  
 
1 93%.  
2 More than 90%.   
4 vaccine.  How to fund and incentivize such an outcome is another urgent challenge facing 
economists, not least to overcome production and logistical constraints.  
Developing countries should also partake in the gathering and building of large public databases 
on which to train AI. The costs of doing so are small, and the potential benefits, given the need 
for unbiased and representative data on the pandemic, is high. The construction of such 
databases should be seen as an investment against future pandemics.  
Finally, the combination of surveillance, AI, and testing, may help developing countries ease 
restrictions and lockdowns earlier. But , as was discussed, this will come at the risk of 
compromised data privacy —a risk that may have to be taken in the interest of public health and 
the re -opening of economies . The risk can be managed through appropriate governance.  
Conclusion  
How developing countries go about their AI -based surveillance and testing will be crucial. 
Developing country governments and the global community need to ensure adherence to the 
highest ethical standards and transparency. If they do not, then they may face the prospect that 
people will lose what little trust they had in government, which  will, as I enca and V ayena pointed 
out, ‘ make people less likely to follow public -health advice or recommendations and more likely 
to have poorer health outcomes. ’ For the developing countries of Africa, this makes it imperative 
that they ratify the African Union’ s convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data 
Protection —the  Malabo  Convention—as soon as  possible. Only two countries have so far done 
this. And, they should also, consistent with the convention, stop limiting internet access and 
restricting digital information flows.  
Developing countries still face a substantial digital divide, and the worl d’s poorest region, sub-
Saharan Africa, faces a particularly daunting  challenge. The COVID -19 crisis, and its likely long -
term consequences —in terms of accelerating automation, online trade, reshoring, and the 
increase of market power for large incumbent digital platforms —should spur on these countries 
to see the current crisis as an opportunity to speed up their digitalization,  and to leverage funding 
for the long -term upgrading of data infrastructures and skills.    
References  
African Union (AU) (2014). Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection . Adopted by the 
23rd Ordinary Session of the Assembly, Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, 27 June.  
Baldwin, R. (2020) . ‘It’s not exponential: An economist’s view of the epidemiological curve’ , VOX 
CEPR Policy Portal,  12 March.  
Barrett, S. (2007). Why Cooperate?: The Incentive to Supply Global Public Goods . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
Britt, R.R. (2020). ‘Nobody Has a Clue How Many People Have COVID -19’, Medium , 27 March.  
Dewatripont, M., M. Goldman, E. Muraille, and J.- P. Platteau (2020). ‘Rapidly identifying workers 
who are immune to Covid- 19 and virus -free is a priority for restarting the economy’. VOX 
CEPR Policy Portal , 23 March. 
Digfin Group (2020). A.I. Shop goes fro m tracing Covid -19 to virtual banking, DigFin, 6 April at 
https://www.digfingroup.com/sqreem -covid/   
5 Ernst, E., R. Merola and D. Saaman (2018). ‘The economics of artificial intelligence: Implication s 
for the future of work’ , ILO Future of Work Research Paper  5. Geneva: International Labor 
Organization.  
Gershgorn, D. (2020). ‘ We mapped how the coronavirus is driving new surveillance programs 
around the world’ , Medium: OneZero , 13 Apr.  
Gopinath, G. (2020). The Great Lockdown: worst economic downturn since the great  depression, 
IMF Blog, 14 Apri.  
Graham, M.,  S. Ojanperä, M. Anwar, and N. Friederici (2017). ‘ Digital connectivity and African 
knowledge economies ’, Questions de Communication , 32:  345-360. Available at 
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3190182  
Hausmann, R. (2020). ‘Flattening the COVID -19 curve in developing countries’, Project Syndicate, 
24 March.  
Huang , Y., M. Sun, and Y. Sui (2020). ‘How Digital Contact Tracing Slowed Covid -19 in East 
Asia’, Harvard Business Review, 15 April.  
Ienca, M., and E. Vayena (2020). ‘On the responsible use of digital data to tackle the COVID - 19 
pandemic’, Nature Medicine , 27 March  (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591- 020-0832- 5).  
Kreuzhuber, K. (2020). How AI, Big Data and machine learning can be used against the 
coronavirus’ , ARS Electronica Blog , 19 March.  
Lazer, D., R. Kennedy, G. King and A. Vespignani (2014). ‘The parable o f google flu: traps in Big 
Data analysis’ , Science , 343(6176): 1203–05.  
Li, R., S. Pei, B. Chen, Y. Song T. Zhang, W. Yang, and J. Shaman (2020). ‘Substantial 
undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS - 
CoV2)’. Science , 16 March  (DOI: 10.1126/science.abb3221) . 
McNeil, D. (2020). ‘Restrictions are slowing coronavirus infections, new data suggest’,  The  New 
York Times , 30 March. 
Naudé, W. (2019). ‘The race against the robots and the fallacy of the giant cheesecake: immediate 
and imagined impacts of artificial intelligence’, IZA Discussion Paper 12218, IZA Institute of 
Labor Economics, Bonn.  
Naudé, W. (2020). ‘Artificial intellige nce against COVID -19: an e arly review’,  IZA Discussion Paper 
13110, IZA Institute of Labor Economics, Bonn.  
Petropoulos, G. (2020). ‘Artificial intelligence in the fight against COVID -19’, Bruegel , 23 March. 
Rowan, I. (2020). What happens to AI when the w orld stops  (COVID -19)?, Medium: Towards  Data 
Science , 31 March. 
Strubell, E., A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum (2019). ‘Energy and policy considerations for deep 
learning in NLP’ , arXiv , https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02243  
The Economist (2020). Why A Study Showing that Covid- 19 is Everywhere is Good News, April 
11th edition, at https://www.economist.com/graphic -detail/2020/04/11/why -a-study -
showing -that-covid -19-is-everywhere -is-good- news   
Vinuesa, R., H. Azizpour , I. Leite,  et al.   (2020). ‘ The role of artificial inte lligence in achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals’, Nat Commun , 11: 233 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 019-
14108- y  
Yan, W. (2020). ‘Coronavirus tests science’s need for speed limits’ , New York Times , 14 April 
(updated 21 April).  