 
1|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  
 
   
USAID/West Africa Evidence for Development  
GPO -I-00-05-00032 -00  
Awareness of, Demand for, and Satisfaction with 
the West Africa Health Informatics Team 
(WAHIT)  
Midline Study (Burkina Faso and Togo)   
Analytical Report  
 
 
 
 
December 2018 (revised January 2019)  
This report was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).  
It was prepared by International Business and Technical Consultants, Inc. (IBTCI)  under the Evidence for Development (E4D) 
Project .  
 
 
  
2|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
 
USAID/West Africa  
Evidence for Development  
GPO -I-00-05-00032 -00 
 
 
AWARENESS OF, DEMAND FOR, AND 
SATISFACTION WITH THE WEST AFRICA HEALTH 
INFORMATICS TEAM  (WAHIT)  
 
 
MIDL INE STUDY (BURKINA FASO AND TOGO)  
 
 
Analytical Report  
 
 
Dece mber 201 8 (Revised in January 2019)  
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER    
3|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The content of this report is the sole responsibility of International Business and Technical Consultants, Inc. (IBTCI)  
under the Evidence for Development (E4D) Project , and does not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United 
States Government.   
4|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
ACRONYMS  6 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  9 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  10 
Introduction  10 
Methods  11 
Key Findings  12 
Conclusion and R ecommendations  16 
BACKGROUND  18 
STUDY GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  19 
Research Questions  19 
Description of WAHIT  19 
METHODOLOGY  20 
Study Design  20 
Sampling Strategy  21 
Data Collection  21 
Data Collection Instruments  21 
Data Analysis  22 
Ethical Consid erations  22 
MAJOR FINDINGS  23 
Profile of Study Participants  23 
The Health Information System  24 
Common challenges: Prioritized HIS challenges and challenges affecting the conversion to a Digital HIS  25 
Government Plans to Resolve HIS Challenges  28 
Awareness, Potential Contributions and Relevance of WAHIT  29 
Should Governments pay for WAHIT TA?  34 
Request for WAHIT’s technical assistance in the future  35 
Comparison of WAHIT TA to other TA models  36 
Challenges obtaining WAHIT technical assistance  36 
Institutional anchoring and partnership  37 
Advantages of WAHO’s supervision of WAHIIT  37 
Advantages of the WAHO/USAID/Palladium partnership  37 
Future Challenges for Governments and WAHO  38 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  39  
5|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  Annex 1 List of respondents per Country  42 
Annex 2 – Mapping of Research Questions, Instrument Desi gn, and Type of Study Participant  43 
Annex 3 – Instruments Used  43  
6|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  ACRONYMS  
CBW    Community Based Health Workers  
CDC    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
CoE   Centre of Excellence  
DEC   Development Experience Clearinghouse  
DFID    United Kingdom Department for International Development  
DHIMS2                         District Health Information Management System  
DHIS2    District Health Information Software 2  
DHMIS    District Health Management Information System  
DQA    Data Quality Assessment  
E4D   Evidence for Development  
ECOWAS   Economic Community of West African States  
eLMIS    electronic Logistics Management Information System  
FETP   Field Epidemiology Training Program  
GHS   Ghana Health Service  
HIS   Health Information System  
HISP   Health Informa tion System s Program  
HMN    Health Metrics Network  
HP+   Health Policy Plus  
IDSR   Integrated Disease Surveillance Response  
IHRIS    Interconnecting Human Resources Information System  
IP   Implementing Partner   
IT   Information Technology  
KI   Key Informant  
KII   Key Informant Interview  
MDG    Millennium Development Goals  
M&E   Monitoring and Evaluation  
MOH    Ministry of Health  
MOU    Memorandum of Understanding   
7|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  NGO    Nongovernmental Organization  
NHMIS    National Health Management Information System  
NSP   Natio nal Health Policy  
OR   Operational Research  
PDNS    National Health Development Plan  
POR   Prospective Operations Research  
PPME    Project Planning Monitoring and Evaluation  
RMNCH   Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn , and Child Health  
STTA    Short -Term Technical Assistance  
SMS   Short Message Service  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure  
SOW    Scope  of Work  
TA   Technical Assistance  
TCN    Third Country National  
TOR   Terms of Reference  
UiO   University of Oslo  
UNICEF   United Nations International Children’s  Emergency Fund  
USAID    United States Agency for International Development    
WAHIT   West Africa Health Informatics Team  
WAHO    West African Health Organization  
WHO    World Health Organization  
WHO AFRO   World Health Organization Africa Regional Office  
 
  
8|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
9|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This document was prepared by the USAID/WA Evidence for Development (E4D) Project. The French version of the 
report was developed by Dr Ali Sie , consultant based in  Burkina Faso and Paul Tekou from the E4D’s Recipient Group 
(CERA) in Togo. The final English version was developed by Tanou Diallo, E4D Chief of Party.  
The authors wish to acknowledge Sheila Mensah, Senior Communications, Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor, 
Contracting Officer’s Representa tive, and Abdul Bala, Program and Research Analyst, in the Regional Health Office at 
the United States Agency for Development/ West Africa for their continuous support and guidance throughout this 
operations research. The same acknowledgements go to Rebecc a Saxton -Fox (USAID/DC) and the WAHIT team for 
their availability to review and discuss the  evaluation questions, approach and tools during the bi -weekly technical 
meetings.  
Many thanks to the Evidence for Development (E4D) Recipient Group Cabinet d'Expert ise en Recherche Actions  
(CERA) for its contribution to the study implementation  in Togo . We are thankful to the data interviewers , transcribers 
and data managers. We also thank the staffs from the Ministry of Health in Togo, the Ministry of Health in Burk ina Faso 
and all the international partners who voluntary made time to respond to our questions despite their busy schedules.   
10|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Introduction  
 
The Health Information System (HIS) is a fundamental piece of health infrastructure. A strong HIS provides reliable data 
to policy makers (governments, development partners, service providers, and communities) to target health 
interventions, allocate resources, and effectively respond to disease outbreaks. A properly functioning HIS ensures that 
vital information gets into the right hands when needed, enabling policy makers, health managers, and individual health 
care providers to make informed choices about everything , from patient care to national budgets.  
In the past few years, there has been co nsiderable interest by both countries and the donor community in supporting 
HIS, and the focus has been on supporting existing national HIS as opposed to creating parallel mechanisms. The World 
Health Organization (WHO), for example, established the Health  Metrics Network (HMN) in 2005 to support and 
improve HIS in developing countries.1 More recently, there have been efforts to support initiatives in favor of 
measurement and accountability in health, with a summit on this topic organized in 2015 jointly by  the United States 
Agency for International Development (USAID), WHO, and the World Bank as the international community prepared 
for the post -Millennium Development Goal (MDG) era.2 The Health Information Systems Program (HISP) of the 
University of Oslo ha s been involved in HIS reform since the 1990s. They have been supporting  the development of the 
District Health Information Software 2 (DHIS2) commonly used in many countries in Asia and Africa, including West 
Africa. In fact, the 2012 Economic Community o f West African States (ECOWAS) Health Policy and Strategy proposed 
the establishment of an HIS Centre of Excellence in the region. Given the role that the West African Health 
Organization (WAHO) plays in the region, it makes sense for that center to be loc ated within this organization.  
The Ebola outbreak demonstrated the need to continue supporting HIS development in West Africa and to improve 
timely case notification, geographic spread, health service availability , and other relevant health data. The Ebola  outbreak 
also demonstrated the need to rely on a team of health informatics experts from West Africa and/or located there, who 
are familiar with HIS and the cultural context in that part of the world and who can travel easily to different countries in 
the region to provide any support needed. Reliance on technical assistance in this field from other parts of the world 
makes any technical assistance (TA) model less sustainable over the long run. The establishment of the West Africa 
Health Informatics Team ( WAHIT) was envisioned to both complement and supplement any existing health informatics 
technical assistance activities in the region. WAHIT was designed to do the following:  
 Make immediate improvements in national and regional HIS that will help strengthe n public health systems ; 
 Build local software engineering capacity to support long -term sustainability of HIS investments in the region . 
WAHIT is led by WAHO, with funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development, and technical support from 
the USAID’s Health Policy Plus (HP+) Project. WAHIT was established to provide technical leadership and support in 
                                                           
1 Poppe, O.  2012. Health Information Systems in West Africa. Department of Informatics. University of Oslo.  
2 MA4. (2015). The Measurement for Health Measurement and Accountability. http://www.searo.who.int/entity/health_situation_tren ds/the -
roadmap -for-health -measurement -and-accountability.pdf?ua=1  
3  Cenciarelli, 0. , Pietropaoli  S., Carestia  M., D’Amic o F., Sassolini  A., Di Giovanni D. , Rea S., Gabbarini  V., Tamburrini  A., Palombi  L., Belleci C.,  and Gaudio  P.  (2015). 
Ebola Virus Disease 2013 –2014 Outbreak in West Africa: An Analysis of the Epidemic Spread and Response. International Journal of Microbiology, 
Volume  2015 (2015), Article ID  769121, 12 pages.   
11|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  HIS for Ministries of Health (MOH) in ECOWAS countries, with a priority given to Ebola -affected countries: Guinea, 
Liberia and Sierra Leone.  
USAID/WA tasked the West Africa Evidence for Development (E4D) activity to conduct a Prospective Operations 
Research (POR) to provid e research -based evidence on trends in awareness of, demand for, and satisfaction with 
WAHIT and its services.  
POR Study Objectives  
The main goal  of this POR Midline  was to assess trends  in awareness of, demand for, and satisfaction with WAHIT and 
its services in two non-Ebola -affected countries  (Burkina Faso and Togo ) already benefit ting from WAHIT’s TA . The 
study  was conducted after WAHO and WAHIT team had conducted several activities i n Burkina Faso and Togo . 
Relevant Research Questions for Baseline  
Relevant research questions to be answered by the midline measure of the POR and the focus of this report include the 
following:  
● How aware of WAHIT are relevant MOH personnel?  
● Whom do MOH o fficials trust and prefer to address HIS technical challenges to?  
● How do relevant stakeholders outside MOHs perceive WAHIT and this model?  
● What are 
WAHIT’s operational strengths, weaknesses, and challenges?   
● How relevant to the level of awareness and de mand is WAHO’s oversight of WAHIT?  
● Is the partnership (WAHO, Palladium, and USAID) set up for implementing WAHIT effective?  
Methods  
 
The present Prospective Operations Research (POR) was preceded by a baseline study that was conducted in three 
countries (Guinea, Sierra Leone and Ghana) and will be followed by a final study  in all 5 countries . It is a continuous 
evaluation of the acceptance, achievements and challenges of the WAHIT model through the implementation of the 
activity. It essentially used quali tative survey and the information was collected using a semi -structured interview guide  
through in -depth interviews with key informants.  The report relied on information from interviews with a purposive 
sample of 3 2 key informants /stakeholders in two non-Ebola-affected countries (16 in Burkina Faso and 16 in Togo ).  
The sample of KIs included  actors at the national level, notably, the managers  and specialists of the HIS at the MOH  and 
technical and financial partners involved in the reinforcement  of the HIS (see list of participants in annex).  
The target audiences for this research are USAID , including the Africa Bureau, the Global Development Lab Team 
supporting Ebola activities, and the West Africa Regional Mission; the West African Health Organization (WAHO); the 
Ministries of Health (MOH) in the t wo countries; Palladium (HP+), their donors  and local partners in health and in other 
sectors using the health information system (HIS).  
USAID/W A officially introduced the study and researchers to study participants  in Togo and Burkina Faso . E4D, 
including its research team, followed up with emails  and phone calls to secure interviews. Most of the key informants 
(KIs) responded immediately and express ed their availability and willingness to participate in the survey.  
The data collection tools were reviewed to integrate WAHIT’s satisfactory survey questions, and were pre-tested , 
amended and validated before actual data collection began . The first interview was conducted in Burkina Faso on August  
24, 2018 with the Director of the Direction des Systèmes d’Information San itaire/Ministère de la Santé (DSIS/MS). The  
12|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  last interview was conducted in Togo on September 28, 2018 with the representative of the Global Fund/HIV activity in 
Lomé.  
Interviews were taped, transcribed, translated into French/ English when needed, and analyzed using a thematic grid 
developed by randomly selecting three interviews from each country and identifying initial themes. The analysis grid was 
expanded as additional topics emerged. Data were entered in NVivo 12 and word clou ds were created for two topics: 
the WAHIT model and WAHO’s oversight of WAHIT.  
Key Findings  
 
Profile of KIs participant to the POR ?  
The KIs were mainly Ministr y of Health officials at several levels of decision -making. There were specialists in data 
management and HIS managers. Added to this were the focal points or those responsible for the technical and financial 
partners involved in the HIS.  All KIs had a univ ersity education and were predominantly male  (out of the 32 KIs that 
were interviewed , only four were women ). In Burkina Faso, 69% (11/16) of KIs reported having received specific training 
in HIS , compared to  75% (12/16) in Togo. These trainings included t he use of DHIS2 , data management , data processing, 
development of databases as well as specific computer training s. WAHIT and MEASURE Evaluation were mentioned by 
the respondents as the main providers of those trainings. H alf of the KIs reported having  received specific training in 
epidemic  surveillance and reporting of diseases in Burkina Faso and Togo. Th ese trainings were mostly on integrated 
disease surveillance and response  and provided at the health facilities . However, some participants reported having 
benefited from training s organized by CDC on epidemiological surveillance and surveillance -oriented information 
system.  
 
How aware of WAHIT are relevant MOH personnel?  
In general, the awareness of WAHIT was high in Burkina Faso and Togo ; more  than half of the KIs had already either 
heard or had worked  with at least one member of WAHIT . In addition to being informed about the existence of 
WAHIT, most of the respondents  had been in direct contact with  WAHIT team members. Recurring expressions were:  
"WAHIT  support s the health information system", " WAHIT has strongly supported HIS, improving the transmission  of 
reports in Burkina Faso ”. The respondents in both countries who were aware of WAHIT we re unanimous on the 
relevance of WAHIT's technical assistance to support the HIS.  
"It must be said that , truly, among all our partners WAHIT  is the only one organization that has technicians who can be 
called upon to come on site for capacity building. Th e other partners are mainly providing financial support . WAHIT  has 
the technical expertise . WAHIT is always there  to support  us, in particular providing technical assistance while building the 
capacity of the national actors .” Burkina Faso  KI. 
This is different from the baseline study conducted in Guinea and  Sierra Leone where the knowledge of WAHIT was 
limited with vague ideas about the mission and scope of work . This is understandable because the baseline study in 
Guinea and Sierra Leone was conducted when WAHIT was  just starting its operational activities . The present midline 
study in Togo and Burkina Faso was conducted at a time when WAHIT's activities had already started on the ground, 
giving it more visibility .  It is obvious that WAHIT's awareness  is positively improving  throughout the project life cycle 
and will continue to  improve as activities increase. However, the findings from the study show that if the awareness  has 
risen among the MOH partners in both countries , then efforts should  be made to  increase  the knowledge and 
integration of WAHIT ’s activities of other  national and international development partners involved in the 
reinforcement of the HIS .  
Whom do MOH officials trust and prefer to add ress HIS technical challenges ?   
13|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  As for  Guinea and Sierra Leone, there are v arious donors and partners provid ing support for the HIS in Togo and 
Burkina Faso. These partners support both countries  to digitize different subcomponents of th e HIS and integrate them 
into one single platform: DHIS2.  Most of these efforts were initiated in 201 3 and are currently underway with various 
levels of progress . The efforts are intended to collect , clean, transmit, analyze, and use data that pertain to different 
domains: service statistics, disease surveillanc e, supplies, and human resources. Many MOH officials in both countries 
mentioned  WAHIT’s supranational nature , which would allow the transfer and sharing of knowledge, experience and 
lessons learned among the  countries in the sub -region. WAHIT provides TA  in countries that  share the same difficulties, 
same challenges, thereby  increasing the possibility of sharing best practices.  WAHIT's approach is recognized as unique, 
new and beneficial to HIS stakeholders . The KIs indicated  that W AHIT has a multidiscipl inary team with proven 
skills/expertise  in technology and good knowledge  of the West African health information system  environment.  
"Frankly, as I told you, their approach is really new. Their approach is new and very beneficial because they do not need 
to rely on external expertise to come and do the stuff. With other partners, when you express your needs, even if they 
accept  to support , maybe it is financial support or they will be hiring  a cabinet to come and do the work, which is not the 
case for WAHIT.  Because they are people who are involved, they work in a field that talks about health, so they master 
the concepts  and their applications  (....), in any case, I find that WAHIT ’s approach is really new and unique. ”  Burkina 
Faso KI 
Most of the KIs in Burkina Faso highlighted WAHIT’s  responsiveness  to request s for assistance . They were appreciative 
of the  procedures  in place for requesting TA , the availability of the team , their promptness to respond to requests and 
the skills transfer approach  durin g the technical assistance.  In the baseline study conducted in Guinea and Sierra Leone, 
most of the respondents recommended  that WAHIT should  create its own place and niche among all these existing TA 
by complementing existing structures. In Togo and Burkina Faso, WAHIT  is sometimes seen and accepted as the only  
option. The epidemiological history of these different countries, as well as the differen ce in time (for the studies) c ould 
provide  a strong explanation  for the differences in perception . Indee d, with the Ebola outbreak in  Guinea and Sierra 
Leone, the two countries received ( and still receive) diverse and multiple TAs which is not the case in Togo and in 
Burkina Faso. Moreover, the baseline study was conducted in Guinea and Sierra Leone during t he early phase of 
WAHIT's activities , while in Togo and Burkina Faso , opinions of the respondents were based more on the reality and 
individual/collective experiences with WAHIT. The bottom line is that  all the countries aspire to TA  which leads them 
to be independent of multiple systems/subsystems and consultants. T his constitutes a distinctive advantage of WAHIT 
which works to build the capacity of local partners to be autonom ous in terms of technical assistance on IT.  
Does the introduction of WAHIT affect these preferences?  
Clearly, for most of the KIs in the study, the introduction of WAHIT is “a breath of  fresh air” in supporting the HIS. 
Providing onsite training and capacity building while resolving issues seem s to be a unique and much  appreciate d niche 
for WAHIT. According to most of the KIs, among the partners supporting the MOH  in strengthening the HIS , WAHIT 
is one that best meets their specifics n eeds, consisting of deploying solid technical consultants who are able to build their 
capacity wh ile providing the requested technical assistance to solve their issues.  
"WAHIT is a breath of fresh air for the health system because they are addressing a need that  was left behind . In most 
technical units, you will see that existing technical staff needed support. As I said earlier and each time when we identify a  
need, we call for local/international consultants. The consultant arrives, does the work and leaves  (…..). But normally, 
when the consultant  comes to help with  your work, you have to be able to reproduce what you learned  from him/her. But 
this was not the case with the previous consultants. WAHIT now has to play that role, which is to build the technical 
capacity to solve the technical problems th at arise with the HIS . It must close  out then and  not to permanently stay. " Togo 
KI 
The availability of WAHIT’s  staffs and WAHIT’s  approach was also cited by KIs as a relevant factor .  WAHIT's approach 
allows the HIS actors to correctly identify their difficulties, shortcomings, and their own technical assistance  needs.   
14|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
How do relevant stakeholders outsid e MOHs perceive WAHIT and its  model?  
The findings from the midline study show that most of the partners outside the MOH in both countries are in favor of 
WAHIT’s  potential contribution. However, most of them only have a vague  knowledge of WAHIT. This has not changed 
from the baseline study in  Guinea and Sierra Leone. It will be important for WAHIT to develop trust  with other 
partners  and demonstrate its worthiness and missions . The KIs insisted that WAHIT must work harder to be  better 
known through good communication on its missions  and the qu ality of technical assistan ce in the different countries. 
Assigning experts per country or setting up focal points could strengthen  the trust between WAHIT and local partners  
and speed up interventions.  In addition, WAHIT must have a collaborative approach  with the other partners involved in 
the HIS and integrate harmoniously into it. It must remain a technical support and not seek to establish itself as a new 
system . Establish ing a regional database for the  supported countries with standard indicators that will be provided by 
each country will be beneficial to everyone.  However, some part ners believe that since the HIS issue is quite broad and 
involves several partners and areas, especially the management of epidemics such as Ebola, it would be wise to open up 
the consortium further to make it a partnership of all health stakeholders.  This can be done in each country and at the 
regional level by initiating and signing  a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the various  partners intervening in 
the HIS.  
 
What are WAHIT’s operational strengths, weaknesses, and challenges?   
Operational strengths, weaknesses, and challenges are organized into different  categories : strengths, perceived 
weaknesses and challenges  
Strengths:  
WAHIT's strengths largely re ly on the fact  that it is seen by the stakeholders as a supra -national entity (under the 
WAHO umbrella)  that brings highly technical assistance “ cost-free” to different countries. WAHIT is seen as an  original 
model , which bring s TA while strongly working with local stakeholders/actors in the resolution of their own identified 
problems. WAHIT’s model is seen by the KIs as TA model combined with capacity building and skills transfer. The  
flexibility and ease in  obtaining TA, the ava ilability of WAHIT’s technical staffs  make it a unique model according to the 
interviewees. T he KIs also mentioned the expertise of WAHIT  and the ir provision of very practical training.  At the time 
of the evaluation, WAHIT had already been contacted, at le ast twice, by the MOHs in both countries ( Burkina Faso and 
Togo ) for technical assistance . The requests were essentially focused on supporting the MOH in both countries to 
identify various challenges and needs  their HIS are facing but also provide on-site technical assistance and training. A 
workplan/ timeframe for TA activities to be provided by WAHIT has even been d eveloped in Burkina Faso.   
“We organized a meeting with various  stakeholders to identify our challenges and needs. Following th e meeting, we 
requested technical assistance from WAHIT . Their technical team came to Ouagadougou and together we identified what 
WAHIT c ould do and what would need additional support (that WAHIT could not do) . Then we developed a workplan 
with clear timefr ame, which we are implementing now . For the meantime, under WAHIT, I don’t think there is any 
support in terms of equipment and infrastructure; it is mainly in terms of expertise and training – that’s all.” Burkina Faso  
KI. 
WAHIT  has been training stakeholders in Burkina Faso in “system s administration ” and software installation , server 
configuration and installation , data backup system, development of specific queries and application s in the context of 
rapid SMS , database interoperability and IT security. Similarly, the DHIS2 technical team of Burkina Faso received 
capacity building for API implementation. Therefore, one of the key successes of WAHIT is the variety and specificity of 
its technical assistance. In Bu rkina Faso, clearly, WAHIT is seen as a unique partner, capable of providing such high and  
15|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  wide range of IT technical assistance while building the capacity of the beneficiaries. Many KIs in Burkina Faso were very 
appreciative of WAHIT’s approach to provid e solution to IT issues while building the capacity of the stakeholders.  
Another specificity of WAHIT that was mentioned by the KIs is the flexibility in requesting  technical assistance . The 
system developed and implemented in Burkina Faso seem s to be ver y well mastered and appreciated by the HIS officials .  
According to the KIs, all requests are developed and submitted online (form s are available online)  by the HIS staffs. The  
MOH approves and sends/submits them to WAHO  and thereafter WAHIT  reaches out to the requestors.  
“It is worth saying there is lot of flexibility  with WAHIT . We recently submitted a simple request to  WAHO , with the 
Minister’s signature. (….) and WAHIT’s support was immediately aligned. In September 2018 for example, we w ill get 
the support for the operationalization of DHIS2 and some of our systems ”.       
“I forgot to say that, what makes WAHIT the best  is, in addition to provide with the solution , they also teach you how to 
solve your future problem s. WAHIT shows us how  to achieve results. Unlike others who come to give you a solution and 
do everything for you to go back to them in the future. That's really the advantage of WAHIT” Burkina Faso  KI. 
 
Weaknesses/Challenges and Opportunities for improvements : 
No challenge s were mentioned for the technical achievement of WAHIT. According to the KIs, there is no 
administrative burden and they are able to contact  WAHIT directly online .  Instead, they shared some  suggestions that 
would make WAHIT more successful.  These proposed suggestions are presented below:   
 WAHIT should look into developing  and harmoniz ing the Heath Information System in all ECOWAS countries ;  
 WAHIT should work on digitizing the systems ; 
 WAHIT should ensure that the countries can host their own database s;  
 WAHIT should integrate the HIS “local coordination mechanisms” but also the partners' consultation 
framework  established in countries to support the HIS ;  
 WAHIT should p rovide more certified training s and conduct post -training assessment s. WAHIT should provide 
guides and tutorials to be used after training s are conducted . 
 WAHIT should increase the number of experts while taking into account their country of origin and spoken 
languages , which should be a reflection of ECOWAS countries. The establishment of f ocal points in the 
countries could improve the availability of the team and the timeliness of their interventions.  
 WAHIT should r eview the duration of their interventions in the countries and allocate sufficient time for 
adequate skill s transfer or proble m resolution.  
 
"As already  said, time  is a problem . I would say this training was really very short... it should have been extended over at 
least a week. One training course can even last two weeks. Now, they don’t go in depth. They came just to do some 
configuration. So, we were just following them. They had time constraints, so we had to finish quickly. At the last moment, 
it was necessary to proceed faster to finish in time". Togo  KI 
 WAHIT should b uild capacity in IT security, maintenance, connectivity , and infrastructure and equipment .  
“Today we have many difficulties with server maintenance. There is no expertise at the national level, well, I mean at the 
Ministry level (...) Especially everything that has to do with server, everything that has to do  with security, everything that 
has to do with hosting; it is really a problem. Except that, in terms of data exploitation, there is no problem. We have 
specialists, we have statisticians; we have really experienced data managers. The problem is really the  security, hosting 
and connectivity aspects .” Burkina Faso KI  
16|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   WAHIT should make itself better known and market itself through meetings. WAHIT is not well known among 
all HIS stakeholders , especially other technical partners involved in the HIS strengthening. These HIS technical 
partners have set up a consultation framework in Burkina Faso but WAHIT is not yet involved.  
 
How relevant  is WAHO’s oversight of WAHIT  to the level of awareness and demand?  
WAHIT's affiliation to WAH O, according to all respondents  (15/16 in Burkina Faso and  16/16 in Togo ) represents a 
huge opportunity  for sustainability of the interventions . WAHO has already established  collaborative rel ationships with 
all the countries and partners in the region  that may be very beneficial to WAHIT. WAHO and WAHIT  are 
empower ing the MOH in the countries. WAHIT is even more efficient because  WAHO has its inter-country 
connections  and can represent , to some extent a pool of inter -country resources, which is an advantage for smoothly 
building the capacity of the national staffs.  
"This is an excellent decision  as it is carried by an organization that has the legitimacy and recognition of the Countries 
and Governments . With WAHO's senior decision -makers and health Ministers, they have a general assembly where they 
make decisions; meaning that if WAHO makes decisions, it is the countries that make decisions." Togo KI 
According to the KIs, WAHIT ’s affiliation  to WAHO represents a solid opportunity to improve the health information 
system across ECOWAS  countries  and build a solid foundation and platform for addressing epidemics in the sub -region. 
The KIs see this affiliation as an opportunity for fut ure integration of countries' information systems  which will optimize 
the use of inputs  and save resources  from duplication . This is an opportunity to build a global response in case of an 
epidemic and provid e relevant information for decision -making at th e regional level . 
Is the partnership set up for implementing WAHIT effective? (WAHO, Palladium, and USAID)  
According to KIs, the advantage of this partnership is first and foremost , the mutual efforts at all levels : the sharing of 
knowledge, resources and experience s. The p artners are all supporting the HIS in terms of design and provision of IT 
equipment .  The partners will each bring on board their own experience s and benefit from each other's experience s. 
WAHO's g ood field knowledge, USAID's extensive presence and P alladium’s  technical expertise make this consortium a 
solid entity. It makes it possible to bring together a number of points for improvement, resource mobilization and 
technical support. Each partner br ings its own specificity that allows the consortium to be viable.  
"It allows the resources to be shared, because if we intervene separately, it would either be a sprinkling or we would 
intervene twice (2) for the same problem . Whereas by creating a partnership like this, it allows to pool resources  and to 
be much more efficient with the highest  quality of services . If the actors are truly engaged for the long run, this could 
eventually lead to sustainability. (…..) And since i t is through WAHO, which is a sub -regional organization composed of 
different governments, it is thought that, if at some point this support were to decline, the various governments could 
eventually bear the costs inherent in that.” Burkina Faso  KI 
Some KIs believe this is an opportunity that WAHO must seize to consolidate its position and take over to become 
more autonomous. Information is strategic and forms the basis of everything. However, some participants believe that 
since the HIS issue is quite br oad and involves several partners and areas, especially the management of epidemics such 
as Ebola, it would be wise to open up the consortium further to make it a partnership with all stakeholders  intervening 
in the Health sector . 
Conclusion  and Recommenda tions  
 
Conclusion   
17|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The Health Information System of Burkina Faso and Togo are all designed around DHIS2 with different experiences; 
Burkina Faso introduced DHIS2 in 2013 and Togo more recently in 2017. However, the challenges in both countries in 
terms of digital HIS are similar in several respects and can be summarized as follows:  
 Data quality (completeness, promptness, consistency , etc.); 
 Multiplicity of data sources ; 
 Insufficient human resources in quantity and in quality ; 
 Inadequate data analysis/use of data ; 
 Insufficient funding for HIS ; 
 Insufficient infrastructure and equipment (computers, servers, software, maintenance problems, data security, 
electricity, internet connection , etc.) 
  
WAHIT is now well known in both countries with a high level of satisfaction. The first experiences of technical support 
were very well appreciated and the WAHIT model seems to convince partners who find it a viable option that they 
would be willing to not only use in the future but also recommend to other colleagues /countries  outside West Africa. 
WAHIT's anchoring within WAHO is a major asset and a guarantee of success because it automatically benefits from 
WAH O's credit and audience. A few concerns about WAHIT's interventions are related to sustainability . It is not yet 
certain in both countries how WAHIT’s successes could be maintained after the project ends.  
Specific Recommendations  
● Use multiple avenues to inform different stakeholders of what WAHIT is, what it can do, and how international 
partners and countries can tap into the technical assistance the team may provide. This could include meetings that 
WAHO has already scheduled in the countries and/or joining local HIS taskforces;  
● Engage more senior health officia ls in the management of data quality issues ; 
● Develop and standardize the Health Information System across E COWAS countries. This would enable the 
implementation of health system metadata within the WAHO space and provide a global response to an outbreak 
by making available timely  and relevant information  to the national and regional decision -makers; 
● Create a platform for promoting and sharing good practices/experiences among ECOWAS countries ; 
● Promote the interoperability of the different existing systems th rough the development of specific applications which  
capitalize /computerize  all data in a single database.  
● Provide more consistent training s with tutorial guides  and give recognition through  awarding  official  certificate s. 
● Review the duration of field interventions to allow sufficient time for adequate skill s transfer and/or problem s 
resolution ; 
● Reinforce  capacity building in IT security, maintenance, internet connectivity,  and data hosting in the  countries ; 
● Broaden the range of activities beyond TA and hav e a holistic view of the health information system ranging from 
data collection, administration and management to integrating aspects of infrastructure and equipment (computers, 
servers)  
● Once the technical area of support is ide ntified, one way to organize  WAHIT TA is to start with a short -term TA 
visit, followed by intermittent visits as needed. Additionally, provid ing remote  assistance to ensure smooth 
implementation of recommendations and know -how transfer.  
● Create a regional “pool” of trainers and TA which WAHO would tap on whenever needs are;  
● Appoint ‘local -in-country focal points” for WAHO and WAHIT;  
● Regularly (at least once a year) organize  regional meeting for of IT and HIS partners to discuss about issues, 
challenges and lessons learned;  
● WAHIT to join and be member of all the existing partnerships and “tasks forces” at the country and regional levels. 
18|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  BACKGROUND  
The Health Information System (HIS) is a foundational piece of health infrastructure. A strong HIS provides reliable data 
to policy makers (governments, development partners, service providers, and communities) for targeting health 
interventions, allocating resource s, and effectively respond ing to disease outbreaks. A properly functioning HIS ensures 
that vital information gets into the right hands when needed, enabling policy makers, health managers, and individual 
health care providers to make informed choices about everything from patient care to national budgets. However, in 
West Africa, HIS are weak and face several challenges, including poor governance and accountability. Furthermore, the 
HIS are under -utilized and incomplete with regard  to information on health s ervice availability, infection control options, 
case notification, geographic spread, and relevant animal health data.  
The 2014 –2015 Ebola outbreak in West Africa exposed severe weaknesses in regional HIS. The outbreak went  
unnoticed during its initial we eks until the first serious symptomatology and deaths  appeared , and it eventually infect ed 
nearly 28,000 individuals and claim ed 11,310 lives.3,4 Local responders lacked critical information such as case 
notification, transmission rates, geographic spread,  and health service availability  needed to monitor and manage the 
situation comprehensively and in real time . If this information had been readily available, large -scale human and economic 
losses could have been avoided. Furthermore, as Ebola erupted acros s West Africa, a weak communications 
infrastructure and the lack of a two -way real -time disease data collection and analysis system hampered the ability of 
health care workers to respond to the crisis.  
Against this backdrop, national governments, regional  institutions , and international organizations aim to set up a strong 
HIS across the West Africa region. During the 2015 Annual Meeting of National HIS Managers in Accra hosted by the 
West African Health Organization (WAHO) and the United States Agency for  International Development (USAID) , all 
15 members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) recognized a lack of technical capacity to 
maintain and adapt critical digital health platforms as a contributing factor for challenges faced durin g the national 
response to Ebola in West Africa. They also affirmed that reliance on external support jeopardizes the successful 
implementation of digital tools for health and can be a critical impediment to further progress in public health systems 
develo pment. Therefore, USAID, in partnership with other key players , opted to support WAHO in building a West 
Africa Health Informatics Team (WAHIT) that will serve to fill this gap by acting as a regional resource to provide 
technical support to national Minis tries of Health ( MOH ) for HIS improvements.  
In 2017 USAID/WA tasked the West Africa Evidence for Development activity (E4D) to  conduct a Prospective 
Operations Research (POR) and provid e research -based evidence on trends in awareness of, demand for, and 
satisfaction with WAHIT and its services in three countries (Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Ghana).5 The final report was 
completed  by E4D and  approved by USAID in February 2018 and uploaded on  the Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC) on March 2018.  
 
In 2018, USAID/WA tasked E4D  again to conduct a midline study in Togo and Burkina Faso. The target audiences for 
the research are USAID including the Africa Bureau, the Global Development  Lab Team supporting Ebola activities, and 
the West Africa Regional Mission; the West African Health Organization (WAHO); the Ministries of Health (MOH) in 
the three countries; Palladium (HP+), their donors and local partners in health and in other sectors  using the health 
information system (HIS).
                                                           
3  Cenciarelli, 0. , Pietropaoli  S., Carestia  M., D’Amic o F., Sassolini  A., Di Giovanni D. , Rea S., Gabbarini  V., Tamburrini  A., Palombi  L., Belleci C.,  and Gaudio  P.  (2015). 
Ebola Virus Disease 2013 –2014 Outbreak in West Africa: An Analysis of the Epidemic Spread and Response. International Journal of Microbiology, 
Volume  2015 (2015), Article ID  769121, 12 pages.  
 
4 World Health Organization. (2016). Ebola Data and Statistics. http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.ebola -sitrep.quick -downloads?lang=en . 
 . 
5 Liberia was expected to be included in this assignment, but it was subsequently dropped at the request of the USAID Global De velopment Lab.   
19|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
STUDY GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  
The main goal of  E4D’s midline Prospective Operations Research (POR) is to assess trends  in awareness of, demand for, 
and satisfaction with WAHIT and its services in two non-Ebola -affected countries : Burkina Faso and Togo .  
The POR has the following primary objectives : 
1. To identify factors  influencing the Ministry of Health ’s decisions to engage WAHIT technical support (versus the 
support of alternative service providers)  
2. To assess satisfaction with WAHIT services, and to generate data to inform program adaptation  
3. To identify challenges  and barriers  faced by health stakeholders (health workers  and MOH officials) in adopting 
and managing the WAHIT model  
Research Questions  
The POR aims  to answer the following research questions:  
1. How aware of WAHIT are relevant MOH personnel? How does awareness change over the project life cycle?  
2. What level of demand is there for WAHIT services? Is demand sufficient to justify the model ’s continuation? 
How will demand change over time as WAHIT establishes  itself?6 
3. Who m do MOH officials trust and prefer to address HIS technical challenges  to? Does the introduction of 
WAHIT affect these preferences?  
4. How do relevant stakeholders outside MOHs perceive WAHIT and this model?  
5. How is/isn ’t WAHIT meeting the needs of MOH officials? What can WAHIT do to better identify and meet 
needs?7 
6. What are WAHIT ’s operational strengths, weaknesses, and challenges? What can be done to improve 
operational effectiveness?8 
7. How relevant to the level of awareness and demand is WAHO ’s oversight of WAHIT?  
8. Is the partnership set up for implementing WAHIT effective (WAHO, Palladium , and USAID) ?  
 
Description of WAHIT  
WAHIT is a partnership of USAID with other key players to support WAHO that will serve as a regional resource to 
provide technical support for HIS improvements. The overall goal of WAHIT is to provide HIS technical leadership and 
support to Ministries of Health (MOH)  within the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), with an 
initial focus on the Ebola -affected countries of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.  The specific objectives of WAHIT are 
as follows : 
1. Set up a regional team of experts ( software develop ers, business analyst, and team lead) to make immediate 
technical improvements in the national and regional digital HIS that will help strengthen public health systems. 
These investments —from linking separate systems to automating reporting to building das hboards —can help 
improve health outcomes for some of Africa ’s most vulnerable populations as the region recovers from the 
most devastating Ebola outbreak in history.  
2. Build local software developer capacity to support long -term sustainability of HIS investments in the region. 
During the first year of the team ’s deployment, USAID and partners can test innovative models for providing 
sustainable software development support to the public sector, with the potential to spark transformative 
technology -driven approaches for development in some of the world ’s most resource -constrained countries.  
                                                           
6 This question is not addressed by the baseline.  
7 Ibid. 
8 The baseline addressed only the first part of the question.   
20|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT    
 
 Midline:  
         Endline  
August -September  
2018         May–June 2017     May -June  2019  
Implementation of the WAHIT model  Programmatic  
data Programmatic  
data 3. Support a strategic recommendation from the 2012 ECOWAS Health Policy and Strategic Plan to establish a 
regional HIS Cente r of Excellence (CoE).  
To achieve these obj ectives, WAHIT was designed to assist the MOH in the host countries  with fixing, adapting , and 
maintaining their HIS.  Illustrative activities include  the following : 
● Integrating a separate District Health Information Software (DHIS2) component  for malaria r eporting into the 
national DHIS2  platform  
● Creating a Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn , and Child Health (RMNCH) dashboard based on existing 
indicators  
● Integrating the newly approved Tuberculosis Form into the national DHIS2  platform  
● Automating the reporting  of the National Health Management Information System (NHMIS) data into WAHO ’s 
DHIS2 platform  
● Continu ing training of District Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) officers for data entry and reporting quality  
The activity started in September 2016 (with the pilot phase ending in December 2017), with the flexibility to continue 
into 2018  and 2019 . WAHO is implementing the WAHIT project with the support of USAID and Palladium.  
Within the first year of operation , WAHIT is tasked with  the following : 
● Establishing standard operating procedures (SOP) for providing support to MOHs  
● Providing technical support to improve national HIS platforms based on criteria agreed upon by WAHO and USAID  
● Documenting and establishing best practices for regional digital health support to MOHs ; technical assistance 
provided by this team will also seek to accelerate HIS interoperability in the region  
● Conducting a viability assessment to inform the business case for whether a fuller and long -term regional WAHIT 
should be launched with a sustainable model for recruitment and training, and whether/ how to link to the proposed 
WAHO Centre of Excellence  (if so, the assessment will also identify significant factors influencing program success 
and recommendations for implementation and sustaina bility) 
 
METHODOLOGY  
Study Design  
The prospective operations research study uses a quasi -experimental prospective design. It is being implemented in two 
Ebola -affected ( intervention ) countries (Guinea and Sierra Leone) and three Ebola -unaffected ( nonintervention ) countr ies 
(Ghana , Togo and Burkina Faso ). The process includes three measurements. Figure 1 presents the study timeline  and it 
serves to place the mid line in context . 
Figure 1:  Proposed Timeline  of the WAHIT Intervention and Prospective Operations Research  
Baseline:  
  
21|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The E4D team conducted the baseline before the commencement of WAHIT services implementation (May 2017), with 
the understanding that scoping visits ha d already been completed in Guinea and Sierra Leone .9 The baseline survey 
assessed factors, perception s, and intention s to use the WA HIT model. The midline survey was conducted in August -
September 2018 to assess any changes that had occurred since the baseline survey.  
Sampling Strategy  
This study used data from a purposive sample of 3 2 key informants : Togo  (n=16) and Burkina Faso  (n=16). The initial list 
of study participants, proposed by USAID with WAHO and Palladium ’s concurrence, was reviewed to integrate more 
key players of HIS in Togo and Burkina Faso . Modifications to the initial list occurred in response to the implementation 
reality on the ground,  and were  discussed  with and approved by USAID /WA. USAID/West Africa introduced the study 
and researchers to study participants.  The E4D research team followed up with emails and phone calls to secure 
interviews.  Most of the key informants (K Is) responded immediately and express ed their availability and willingness to 
participate to the survey , which was a good indication of their  collaboration with WAHIT.  The sample of KIs included  
actors at the national level, notably, managers  and specialists of HIS within  the MOH  and technical and financial partners 
involved in the reinforcement  of the HIS. The list of KIs at the midline may be found  in Annex 1; it is broken down by 
location, institutional affiliation and role .  
Data Collection  
Data collection occurred during the months of August and 
September 2018 in Burkina Faso and Togo . Two Seniors 
Health Evaluation Specialist s conducted the interviews. The 
data collection occurred when WAHIT TA was already in the 
two countries . The data were collected through face -to-face 
interviews . 
Data  Collection Instruments  
During the baseline, E4D had constructed a matrix reflecting 
(i) the research questions; (ii) the corresponding field 
questions to be included in the data collection tools; and (iii) 
the study participants who would provide information. There 
are four categories of study participants: (1) MOH staff , (2) 
implementing partner (IP) staff and inter national organizations 
(UNICEF and WHO) , (3) WAHO and Palladium , and (4) USAID. Th e matrix also indicate d, which questions need to be 
used at the different measuring points (baseline, midline , and endline). This separation is important because many of the 
questions concerning perceptions about the WAHIT technical assistance provided pertain  only to the midline and 
endline. In addition, some of the KIs  are not technical assistan ce recipients and therefore should not be asked questions 
pertaining to the quality of assistance received. Before starting the data collection for the midline, E4D  revised the data 
collection tools (used during the baseline) to consider ongoing activities and to incorporate questions from the WAHIT 
Client Satisfaction Surv ey. The questionnaires were  then piloted in Togo and amended before actual data collection  
began. The numbering of questions in the different versions of the instruments remain the same for easy question 
identification when discussing instruments. The matr ix constructed appears in Annex 2 and t he instruments used in the 
study may be found in Annex 3.  
 
                                                           
9 The final report will emphasize that as a result, Guinea and Sierra Leone are expected to have a greater awareness of WAHIT a t baseline.  
Interview at HIS office in Togo   
22|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  Data Analysis  
Interviews were conducted in French, taped , transcribed and analyzed using a thematic grid developed by randomly 
selecting three interviews from each country and identifying initial themes . The analysis grid w as expanded as additional 
topics emerged.  Data were entered in NVivov12 and word clouds were created for two topics: the WAHIT model and 
WAHO ’s oversig ht of WAHIT.   
The transcription of Key Informant Interviews ( KIIs) began immediately after the interview s. To complete the data 
analysis the following actions were performed :  
 
● Developing the grid by doing an initial identification of themes in three randomly selected interviews from each 
country  
● Expanding the topics in the analysis grid as additional topics emerged  
● Using verbatim remarks and having sentences as the unit of analysis  
● Grouping results by key areas of interest  
● Identifying different posit ions in relation to each important topic  
● Summarizing each position and assessing its strength or degree of importance  
Ethical Considerations  
Measures were taken to pro tect the rights of human subjects who participate d in the study and to adhere to the ethi cal 
principles of respect, beneficence, and justice as defined by The National Commission for the Protection of Human 
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.10 E4D submitted the study protocol to USAID/WA for approval. The 
interview guide included a consent sentence recognizing the participant ’s right to refuse the interview before and/or 
during the research. All participants agreed to have their interview recor ded. 
                                                           
10 National Institutes for Health. (1979) Regulations and Ethical Guidelines: The Belmont Report Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects  of 
Research, Retrieved December 7, 2012, from: The National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Beha vioral Research: 
http://www.biola.edu/offices/clear/media/downloads/BelmontReport2.pdf .  
23|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
MAJOR FINDINGS  
The major findings of this research vary by country  depending on the level of the development of their HIS and the 
various historical challenges that these health systems have faced.  
Profile of Study Participants  
The KIs were mainly Ministr y of Health officials at several levels of decision -making. There were specialists in data 
management and HIS managers. Added to this were the focal points or those responsible for the technical and financial 
partners involved in the HIS.  All KIs ha d a university education and were predominantly male. Out of the 32 KIs that 
were interviewed , only four were women. In Burkina Faso, 69% (11/16) of KIs reported having received specific training 
in HIS compared to  75% (12/16) in Togo. These trainings incl uded the use of DHIS2 , data management , data processing, 
development of databases as well as specific computer training s. WAHIT and MEASURE Evaluation were mentioned by 
the respondents as the main providers of those trainings. H alf of the KIs reported having  received specific training in 
epidemic  surveillance and reporting of diseases in Burkina Faso and Togo. Th ese trainings were mostly on integrated 
disease surveillance and response  provided at the health facilities . However, some participants reporte d having benefited 
from training s organized by CDC on epidemiological surveillance and surveillance -oriented information system.  The 
participants were Medical Doctors (13); Statisticians/Demographers (7); Data base/Computer Specialist s (5) 
Epidemiologists (2) Pharmacists (2); Medical Assistants (2) and Sociologist (1). The participants either had a Master ’s 
Degree (28  participants ) or a PhD (4 participants ). In Burkina Faso, 69% (11/16) of KIs reported having received specific 
training s in HIS. In Togo the percentage of KIs reporting having received any training on HIS was 75 (12/16). In both 
countries, t he HIS trainings received by KIs were either as part of diploma courses (Public Health professionals and 
Statisticians /Demographers) or onsite/on -the-job trainings  which were  mostly  workshops organized at the health 
districts  by the MOH .  In Togo, several KIs reported that they had completed  their training s in the use of the DHIS2. 
Topics covered by trainings included: routine health data man agement organized by MEASURE Evaluation; data 
management and data analysis; development of databases as well as the use of various data processing software.  
The KIs hold different positions/roles depending on the country and organizational structure .  Most of the KIs are 
involved in  the conception  and elaboration of health policies and strategies, the implementation of health policies, 
monitoring of health services and administration and management  of health databases. All the KIs are directly involve d in 
the HIS strengthening  and management.  For the data analysis of the midline study the KIs were grouped into 4 
categories : (1) Operational support ; (2) D evelopment of standards (data collection tools, collection procedures, 
introduction of new data coll ection tools ; (3) P roduction of data ( routine reports, dashboards, epidemiological bulletins, 
development of the national health accounts, etc.); (4) C oordination and management ( coordination of specific surveys, 
promotion of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) , etc. In Burkina Faso, 77% of the KIs  reported that 
they regularly  use both the routine and surveillance  systems  for decision -making ; 23% reported using the routine data 
compiled into the DHIS2. In Togo, 33% reported us ing both the routine health information system and the data 
generated from surveillance; 53% reported using only  (or are only interested in ) routine health information system; 13% 
reported to be only interested and use data from  surveillance. In both countries, the KIs mentioned many other data 
sources, mainly data from large -scale studies/surveys: national health accounts, DHS,  MICS surveys, various malaria 
surveys, program evaluations, general population census, etc.   
24|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The Health Information System  
The routine HIS in Burkina Faso is digitized  and implemented  nationwide. DHIS2 , renamed “ ENDOS ” (Health 
Information  Warehouse) has been in use since  2013. Routine data entry is carried out at the Health District level . At the 
health facility level, data is still collected, computed and completed on paper before submission to the  health district s. 
Most of the surveillance systems are still “ partially digitized ”. The process for digitizing surveillance data is underway in 
16 of the 70 districts in the country. A pro gressive scale up is being planned.  Figure 2 below presents the health 
information system pyramid in Burkina Faso.  
 
Figure 2: Health Information System in Burkina Faso  
 
The routine HIS partially meet s the needs of the KIs in Burkina Faso  even though they all mentioned the lack of  some 
key information to inform their decision -making  process . According to the KIs in Burkina Faso the HIS is still lacking 
relevant data related to the population both at the district and community level s making  it difficult to evaluate the 
effectiveness of some  health interventions.  
 "It must be said that  at this point the routine HIS is not complete and  additional health information is needed. And, when  
we want to use other sources, we realize that they are not well structured and sometimes (…) Therefore, i t is crucial  to 
initiate other types of data collection. Because if we really want use the data for decision making and be efficient, we 
should not simply limit ourselves to collecting the routine data. In principle, all  the health information should be collected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Transmission                                        Pour information                            Exploitation Endos  
 
Saisie des rapports 
mensu els sur Endos  
S&E 
Saisie des rapports 
mensu els sur Endos  
CISSE/DS  
Saisie des rapports 
mensu els sur Endos  
SIM/SPIH  
 S&E 
 S&E 
Elaboration des rap ports 
mensuels  
Privé  
 CSPS  
 CM/CMA  
Elaboration des rap ports 
mensuels  
Unité  
 Unité  
 Unité  
Elaboration des rap ports 
mensuels  
OBCE  
Direction Régionale de la santé  
La DSS contr ôle la 
complétude, la coh érence 
des données et élabore les 
BEIS trimestriellement , 
l’annuaire statistique  
Structures 
centrales  
OBCE  
 OBCE  
CHR/CHU  
District Sanitaire  
OBCE  
ASBC  
 ASBC  
 ASBC   
25|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  comprehensively (...) In addition, other sectors generate information (….) it would be interesting to have all these sources 
of data  connected;  because triangulating  the information  will enable us t o make better decisions. ”  Burkina Faso  KI. 
 
In Togo the HIS is now digitized  and running  on DHIS2, which is in its first years of implementation after the pilot phase . 
The DHIS2 in Togo  seems to integrate both routine and surveillance  data.  
"For years we were using paper -based questionnaire s 
to conduct Evaluations  in Togo . But now most of the 
time, we use tablet s and phone s for data collection. " 
Togo KI.  
"This year, we developed  and installed an integrated 
database , DHIS2 . Starting from the health facility, 
the data are  collected using  tablet s and , at the 
central, we have immediate  access to the  data. We 
conduct data  analysis and provide feedback. " Togo 
KI.  
"In Togo, with  DHIS2 we have both routine and 
surveillance data, it's a whole set that we have . We 
need information we know where to look for it." 
Togo KI. 
"DHIS2 is an integrated  robust and secure system. 
With DHIS2 we have access to the data from all health facilities as it is a web system. The system is designed in such a 
way that each health facility  easily enters its routine data.» Togo KI. 
Also, u nlike Burkina Faso, where data entry into the DHIS2 is centralized at the distri ct level, in Togo the data entry is 
carried  out at the  health facilities , which are  equipped for this purpose.  
"Now with the DHIS 2 I think it's much better . All the  health facilit ies enter their data, simultaneously, on a monthly basis , 
using their tablets . We can check on the data at every level of health system”. Togo KI  
In Togo, the KIs globally express ed their satisfaction with the routine data system even though they  also mentioned  
some issues: completeness, readiness and often the multiplicity of sources.  
"Yes, the data that we generally need, I'll say up to 90%, we have these data, but they are not always of the best quality 
and they do not arrive in time. ” Togo KI 
Similar to  Guinea and Sierra  Leone, the KIs in Togo and Burkina Faso mentioned that they  also use data from specific 
survey s and evaluation s to complete the information generated by the routine HIS.  
Common challenges: Prioritized HIS challenges and challenges affecting the 
conversion  to a Digital HIS  
The HIS in both countries face several similar challenges ranging from data collection to data  quality , data analysis and 
use, and data dissemination . These challenges  can be grouped as follows : 
Data quality  
HIS Manager describing how the data in collected, uplo aded and transferred to 
the central  level of the MOH  in Togo   
26|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The quality of the data collected and generated through the routine HIS seems to  be the most common issue for the  KIs 
in Togo and Burkina Faso .  
"We generally have a problem with data quality, data prompt ness and completeness. The routine reports are not alway s 
exhaustive . Sometime, not all variables or information are filled in. Even the validity and veracity of the data is a challenge.  
In Togo the governance and accountability of the HIS staffs should be improved. ” Togo KI  
The questions about the quality of t he data cover several topics: how the data is collected and  completeness of the 
collected data.  The HIS is not always comprehensive and exhaustive because it mainly focuses on the public health 
sector and therefore does not fully integrat e the private  or community  and traditional health systems . In both countries, 
the private sector is not part of the national HIS and  despite many  efforts , the community -based health workers (CBWs)  
are not always integrated and/or most of the time they face frequent disrupt ion of data collection forms/ tools.  
The quality of data generated by the HIS is also sometimes impacted by  the existence of multiple data entry points 
between  the registers, paper -based entry points, tablets and the 
DHIS2 entry at the district level , especially in Burkina Faso. Each 
level of data entry could be a potential source of error. This 
problem of multiple entry points is minimized in Togo with the 
provision of 700 tablets in the public health facilities for data entry.   
Although some public health facilities are yet to receive their tablets, 
most of the m are already  covered by the program. Unfortunately, 
that’s not the case with the private health facilities  which were not 
consid ered by the decision makers. However, KIs believe that 
digitizing the provider ’s registr ies would significantly reduce errors 
in data entry.  Fortunately, in the two countries, many tools and 
approaches have been implemented to improve  data quality.   These 
include the WHO’s Data Quality Improvement Plan  and Data 
Quality Control Guide , the  Monthly Activity Report ( MAR) in 
addition to the quality control built into  the DHIS2 itself. Some KIs mentioned  that even if the tools are available, they 
are rarely used by the HIS professionals . Reasons for not properly implementing these quality control procedures  
include: the lack of involvement of key managers ; lack of continuous training /supervision ; and the high turnover of staffs .  
Multiplicity of data collection  points  
There is a lot of data produc ed in Togo and Burkina Faso that are not used. To date, there are still many parallel data 
collection  systems  in the countries and the KIs highly recommend that all the data collected be made  available and 
accessible to  stakeholders on a single platform. Hence the necessity  of robust  interoperability procedures and systems, 
integrating all the existing parallel and different data sources. This can only be achieved by using relevant and harmonized 
indicators  by clarifying  their definitions, method of calculation and data source. This will require collaboration between 
all actors /stakeholders  supporting  HIS. During the study, it was noticed that many partners (some international) are  still 
developing and implementing parall el data collection  systems directly resulting in duplication of the information  generally 
collected by the same individual (the health provider) . This leads to an increased workload for health  facility staffs and 
negatively impacts  not only the quality  of the data but also the quality of the health services  provided . 
"When we ask the staffs to collect too many indicators , they become  overloaded . Then they cannot do a good work; they 
just try to complete the forms sometimes with inaccurate  data. To have true data, data of quality, we must minimize their 
data collection efforts ”. Togo KI 
Data analysis/data use  
Stock of Tablets at the MOH in Togo   
27|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  One of the key findings of the study is that the data generated by the HIS in both countries is not always used for 
decision making. Very little  data analysis is completed at the national level t o produce mandatory documents such as the 
periodic health statistics bulletins, dashboards, annual reports, etc. The KIs and especially the international partners 
reported lack of accountability  as a major issue .   
“Recently, when we were completing the national health accounts, the Minister asked us a simple question: what kind of 
decision s do we make using these national health accounts? The reports are there, the data is there but we do not  use 
them for making decisions." Togo KI  
Lack of qualified personnel  
Lack of qualified personnel at both the central and operational levels, high turnover of health professionals in charge of 
HIS may explain the poor use of data and lack of data analysis.  Some KIs believe that training health personnel for data 
management is not enough and that database managers and administrators are  also needed . 
"In our health facilities we collect data more for reporting than for our internal need/ use. However, the main reason for 
collecting data is for use and not just for  reporting (...) The universal approach of training health workers in data collection 
is not effective , it solves the problem of data collection and fast processing monthly  report s but does not address  the 
problem of data analysis and data use." Togo KI. 
Funding the HIS  
The HIS, according to the KIs , mainly in Togo  is ill-funded from the national budget, which often compromises activities 
such as data quality assessment and validation . This situation was not reported directly in Burkina Faso. In both 
countries, however, it should be noted that the HIS is mostly supported by international partners.  
“Funding is a challenge! When you consider the workplan and budget for our MCH unit for example,  you will never see a 
budget line for  data collection , data  validation of data dissemination. This is really a challenge for us ”. KI Togo  
Insufficient infrastructure in HIS  
The HIS in both countries suffers significant  lack of infrastructure ( computers, equipment, internet connection, sources 
of energy, software, and security). Only updated  equipment  with internet connection  and a reliable source of  energy 
would  help address this challenge.  The lack  of internet coverage and its instability (where Internet  is available) 
dramatically influence s the HIS  promptness. Even when  minimum equipment is available, there are still issues with 
maintenance and/or updat ing software.  
"There is insufficient equipment and technicians for the maintenance of th e existing equipment. Having the equipment is 
one thing but being skilled to ensure the  maintenance of that equipment is another thing. The last time we conducted an 
inventory of our equipment, we realized that nearly 83% of the smartphones procured for  data collection at the 
community level were not anymore functional. ” Togo KI. 
For many KIs, specifically  from Burkina Faso , the physical location of the DHIS2 server in Oslo, Norway , was a concern . 
The following  quotation from one KI neatly  summarize s the main challenges reported by the various KIs: 
"Well, the first challenge of the HIS is the data processing and management ; the HIS produces data of poor quality ; this 
is the first element. I can say this based on two Data Quality Assessment s (DQA) that  I personally conducted in 2014 and 
2017 . Even if some improvements are noticeable, the data produced by the HIS is still  of poor  quality (...) 
Second ly, there  is a problem with the data transmission. There is a conflicting agenda between timeliness of the data 
reporting and the data completeness and promptness . Indeed, the data arriving at the district level is almost always timely 
but almost always incomplete. The  data arrive on time but incomplete. This is caused by the fact that the district s  
28|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  Managers ar e more focused on the data reporting : is the report submitted  on time? By the time they ask themselves 
whether the report is correct or not; they have already checked it as submitted and entered . (...) 
Another  element  is the personnel in charge of the HIS. The turnover of staffs is very high at all levels of the HIS. While  
very few train ings on HIS are supported by partners and the MOH , the frequent turnover of personnel presents a  
challenge for HIS. From the central MOH level down to peripheral level everyone moves, there is no memory  and no 
memory no system. W e must computerize the whole HIS (…). I am convinced that  with the systematic computerized 
HIS, errors will be minimized while the memory is built. We should introduce, at least , tablets  at the Health Facility level .” 
Burkina Faso  KI 
The HIS needs continuous reinforcement /improvements  and must be dynamic to adapt to different situations. This 
reinforcement should cover  the infrastructure, equipment and maintenance, human resources and internet connection.  
The various partners supporting  HIS in Burkina Faso form a “Consultation group ” which presents  an opportunity for a 
long-term solution . 
Government Plans to Resolve HIS Challenges  
The MOH in both countries are aware of the different challenges that the HIS is facing and have developed plans to 
address th ose challenges in partnership  with different stakeholders . In Burkina Faso, the National Health Policy (NSP) 
selected the HIS as one of the  eight (8 ) technic al strategic axes of the National Health Development Plan ( PNDS  in 
French)  for the period 2011-2020. It integrates a strategic plan for the HIS which  are operationalized in annual plans at 
all levels. Many strategic and operational plans have been developed to improve and strengthen the data quality  of 
epidemiological surveillance . One of them is the  eHealth  sectori al Cyber  strategy 2016 – 2020 where one specific 
objective is to increase the coverage of at least 95% of peripheral health centers with  appropriate ICT solutions for the 
transmission of health information . The Government in Burkina Faso is using its internal resources to improve the 
internet connectivity  in the country . In Burkina Faso there is M inistry in charge of digital economy development  with a 
specific project named G-Cloud.  
"Well, the Ministry of Health is working with  the Ministry of Digital Economy Development to face the challenges related 
to the  technolog y and IT infrastructure . That particular Ministry is engaged in many  activities including  strengthening the 
national capacit y to host mega data (...) They envision to having at least six (6) nodes and servers throughout the country 
to securely host  data. There is also a Project named PAD-TIC project (ICT Development Suppor t Project) which aims at 
strengthening the Internet connectivity and interconnection capacity throughout the Country.” Burkina Faso  KI 
Additionally, some  partners such as the Global Fund  and USAID are involved in improving the quality of data by training 
data managers and support ing internet connectivity with acquisition of 3G , connecti ng the health districts  and hospitals 
in Burkina Faso. WHO also provides technical assistance for the development of data collection tools and guide s to 
improve the quality of routine  data as well as monthly reports.   
Togo has  also developed a health development plan with a specific component  on strengthening the national health 
information system . The plan was developed and validated in 2017 and will go up until 2022. In addition to this plan, 
there is a nother  computer master plan which will be  implement ed based  on the availability of resources. To improve 
internet connecti vity, the e-government has a system which allows more than a dozen sites to be interconnected by 
optical fiber with high speed internet . In addition, the Government is Togo is working to establish a "data center" which 
will enable the MOH to locally host the DHI S2 server while  ensuring optimal  conditions for continuous backup and 
security.   
"Yes, in Togo we have a very good plan for reinforcing the HIS . Having a plan  is one step forward. Ensuring the resources 
are mobilized the implement the plan is the key issue . I am sure this  is not done yet." T ogo KI   
29|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  In Togo the idea of involving the private sector and the civil society organizations to fund the HIS has been discussed.  
"... How to encourage creativity among  national private companies? For example, h ow to mobilize resources from non -
Governmental  stakeholders to support the HIS . I see “Espoir -Vie-Togo” and ATBEF, for example, who can support the 
MOH . So how to create some kind of national champions who are going to support the system. We can do something 
like that, create a kind of partnership to support the system ." Togo KI  
Awareness,  Potential Contributions and Relevance of WAHIT  
 
Awareness  of WAHIT  
In general, the awareness of WAHIT was high in Burkina Faso and Togo ; more than half of the KIs had already either 
heard or had worked  with at least one member of WAHIT.  In addition to being informed about the existence of 
WAHIT, most of the respondents  had been in direct contact with WAHIT.  In Burkina Faso, 2/3 of the KIs either knew 
about or had  worked with  WAHIT. One KI said he heard about  WAHIT from WAHO officials and other KIs were 
aware of WAHIT through collaborations with  the technical team and/or had receiv ed technical training s. Overall, most  
of the KIs in Burkina Faso have collaborated or coordinated with WAHIT and have had a very positive impression with 
recurrent expressions being "they support the health information system" ; "They have strongly supported us, even for 
rapid transmission  of data and reports in Burkina Faso ”. 
"When WAHIT was launched as part ner for strengthening the health information system, we were really informed, we 
even receive d the WAHIT team . We exchanged a lot and altogether we developed specific workplan for their support. 
The technical support  has even begun since last year which in principle should continue. ” Burkina Faso  KI. 
"The WAHIT team, yes I know them. T hey came to visit us, introduce d themselves, their areas of intervention s, their 
operational  mechanisms  and they have even started to support us.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
"Recently we were trained on ENDOS and WAHIT was one of the partner s. I know they support the health information 
system. That's all I know but I have not had  the chance to know more about  the pro ject. It is through WAHO that I knew 
their existence ". Burkina Faso  KI 
Awareness of WAHIT was less in Togo with only about half of the respondents ( 7/16) indicating that they had heard of 
WAHIT  and/or had benefited from its support.  
"No, the first time I heard about WAHIT was when I received the message  from USAID/WA . So far , I do not have a very 
clear idea of what WAHIT is about.” Togo KI. 
Respondents in Togo who were aware of WAHIT could not clearly describe the details of the project . However, they 
confirm ed having recently benefitted from a training and/or technical assistance from WAHIT . 
"WAHIT ’s role?  Well, I cannot say exactly !!! WAHIT recently requested that we  go train some countries (Benin, Burkina  
Faso and Guinea)  on how  to improve the quality of  data. We were also recently trained by WAHIT on to initializ e 
servers .” Togo KI. 
Senior Managers at the MOH (Director of Maternal and Child Health for example), and some implementing partners  
(Global Fund and WHO for example)  appear ed to be the least informed about WAHIT compared to data technicians.  
"WAHIT! No, I really never heard about it .”  Burkina Faso  KI. 
"WAHO, yes, but WAHIT, no. I have never met anyone, I do not remember that we talked about that .”  Burkina Faso  KI.  
30|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  These findings are different  from the baseline study conducted in Guinea and  Sierra Leone where the knowledge of 
WAHIT was limited  with vague ideas about the missions and scope of work . This is not surprising because  the baseline 
study in Guinea and Sierra Leone was conducted when WAHIT was just starting its operational activities . The present 
midline study in Togo and Burkina Faso was conducted at a time when WAHIT's activities had already started , giving it 
more visibility with physical  presence. It  is obvious that WAHIT's awareness  is positively improving  throughout the 
project life cycle and will certainly  continue to  improve as activities increase. However, the findings from the study show 
that if the awareness has risen among the MOH partners in both countries , then efforts should be made to  increase  the 
knowledge and integration of WAHIT ’s activities of other national and international development partners involved in 
the reinforcement of the HIS .  
Relevance of WAHIT  TA for digital HIS  
The KIs in both countries are unanimous about  the relevance of WAHIT's technical assistance to support the digital HIS. 
They are convinced that WAHIT will build the capacity of the stakeholders in  the digital HIS. The partners involved in 
HIS are numerous but have d ifferent modes of operation. The importance  of WAHIT is easily described by the 
respondents, especially since there  are only a few partners with skills and expertise on digitalizing HIS. 
"WAHIT's contribution is most  welcome because it helps us fill the gap in technical assistance. A t the national level , we 
have s at up health information system directions. Unfortunately, these units do not receive enough support  from the  
MOH  and the Ministry in charge of the digital economy does not support them enough  neither.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
According to the KI, WAHIT ’s TA is the one that best meets their needs a mong the partners supporting the  MOH . 
WAHIT’s support consisting of assigning highly qualified IT  technicians capable of provid ing the required technical 
assistance while building the capacity of the beneficiaries .  
"It must be said that , truly, among all our partners WAHIT  is the only one organization that has technicians who can be 
called upon to come on site for capacity building.  The other partners are mainly providing financial support . WAHIT  has 
the technical expertise . WAHIT is always there  to accompany us , in particular providing technical assistance while building 
the capacity of the national actors .” Burkina Faso  KI 
"WAHIT i s a breath of fresh air for the health system because they are addressing a need that  was left behind . In most 
technical units, you will see that existing technical staff needed support. As I said earlier and each time when we identify a  
need, we call for local/international consultants. The consultant arrives, does the work and leaves  (…..) But  normally, 
when the consultant  comes to help with  your work, you have to be able to reproduce what you learned  from him/her. But 
this was not the case with the previous consultants. WAHIT now has to play that role, which is to build the technical 
capacity to solve the technical problems that arise with the HIS . It must close  out then and  not to permanently stay. " Togo 
KI. 
Most of the KIs in Burkina Faso and T ogo highlighted WAHIT ’s responsiveness to request s for assistance .  
"What makes WAHIT effective for me is (....) I will say their availability to support us . I have already personally worked 
with them. At f irst, we asked for a training that WAHIT immediately provided. We all noticed high quality of the training . 
It was above  our expectation. In addition, WAHIT ’s interventions are aimed to respond to the specific needs of the 
beneficiaries. W hen you have difficulties and we ask for help, it seemed  natural for them to come and support us . I 
recently requested their support , they immediately reacted and came up with the solution.” Burkina Faso  KI 
Another aspect of WAHIT that made it relevant is  their “ practical training s” based on specific requests  or needs. 
WAHIT , in response to these queries , puts in place a group of experts to address the challenges while training the 
beneficiaries to address potential future issues .   
31|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  "What makes WAHIT relevant is the fact that they respond individuals’’ needs  and requests . In fact, the beneficiary 
identif ies his/her specific weaknesses  and submit s a request to WAHIT. Right after they put together the technical team 
of engineer s and other experts to help address the identified weaknesses. T hat's really justifies its  relevance. This is not a 
vertical stuff where consultants come to impose (...) No, you elaborate your needs, you identify your shortcomings, and 
then they come to support fill these gaps. (…..).  It must also be said that the content of the courses is real ly very oriented 
and very practical; it's not academic stuff that comes to you and then nothing after. Whatever they train you on , you see 
the application immediately . WAHIT’s support has enabled us to improve many things .” Burkina Faso  KI. 
The respondents  also mentioned the competence of WAHIT ’s experts and their openness and willingness to share their 
knowledge  and their expertise in HIS. 
"WAHIT has a team that is made up of specialists who are very competent . They have the ability and willingness to share 
their knowledge and experience with local staffs (…) WAHIT works  to address the existing issues while reinforc ing the 
skills of the beneficiaries. They make sure that the beneficiaries r eally have access to some expertise o n aspects that 
many people tend to neglect : notably the security of the information systems (...). It is already a good start  that they 
strengthen the skills of the local teams . In the long term , they will help us to have enough competent resources to be able 
to implement and str engthen the different information systems .” Burkina Faso  KI. 
 
One of the KIs in Burkina Faso said: "WAHIT is not even an option now but it is THE  option in Burkina 
Faso ”.  
In summary , all the KIs who have worked with WAHIT were appreciative of the  procedures  in place for requesting TA , 
the availability of the team , their promptness to respond to requests and the skills transfer approach  during the technical 
assistance.  In the baseline study conducted in Guinea and Sierra Leone, most of the KIs recommended that WAHIT  
should  create its own place and niche between all these existing TA by complement ing existing structures.  In Togo and 
Burkina Faso, WAHIT is seen and accepted as the only option. The epidemiological history of these different countries,  
as well as the differen ce in time (for the studies) c ould be a  strong explanation  for the differences in perception . With 
the Ebola outbreak in  Guinea and Sierra Leone, the two countries received ( and still receive) diverse and multiple TAs 
which is not t he case in Togo and in Burkina Faso. Moreover, the baseline study was conducted in Guinea and Sierra 
Leone during the early phase of WAHIT's activities , while in Togo and Burkina Faso , opinions of the KIs were based 
more on the reality and individual/colle ctive experiences with WAHIT. The bottom line is that  all the countries aspire to 
TA which allows  them to b e independent from multiple systems/subsystems and consultants. T his is a distinctive 
advantage of WAHIT which works to build the capacity of local partners to be autonom ous in technical  assistance of IT. 
 
Potential HIS Improvements with WAHIT  TA 
The KIs for this midline study regardless of country, previous experience collaborating with WAHIT, knowledge about 
WAHIT seem  to be unanimous about the potential contributions of the project to improving HIS . The suggestions for  
improvement with the support of WAHIT are:  
WAHIT should help the countries in limiting  multiple  circuits of health information by preventing partners fr om creating  
parallel data collection  systems , which result in increased work load, limiting  efficiency. A national consensus would allow 
each country  to integrate selected  indicators for each key domain of the health system.  
"Now our main challenge is how to ensure  coordination among partners involved in the HIS. We are now having the 
DHIS2 , which  should satisfy all partners. It is true that we are not yet at 100% deployment but th at’s not an excuse for  
32|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  partners to continue building parallel vertical inform ation systems . Now that we have a system which has the potential to 
satisfy everyone, it would be necessary to put limited resources together  and avoid duplication.” Togo KI. 
WAHIT should support countries to have some autonomy in the management of DHIS2.  
"As I mentioned, we have to make sure that everyone can take control of the use of DHIS 2. Within each major unit 
should be deployed at least one staff in charge of the DHIS2 and not always rely  on a small team that cannot always be 
available.” Togo KI. 
WAHIT should promote  the interoperability of the various existing systems through the development of computer 
applications to merge  all data in to a single database.  
WAHIT could help i mprove completeness and data quality.  
WAHIT could help i mprove the epidemiological surveillance system for early detection of and response to epidemics . 
WAHIT should support the compilation and promotion of good practices. This could be done through the creation of a 
platform where experiences are shared among  ECOWAS coun tries. 
WAHIT could support the MOH in reinforcing “HI S Administration ”: The i nfrastructure needed to host DHIS2 , help 
with a viable s erver  and reinforce IT  security . 
WAHIT should s upport the harmonization of policies through the development of standards  guiding young IT 
technicians in the development  of their capacity . 
WAHIT should support ECOWAS countries by i mplement ing a solid metadata for the health system at WAHO.  
"WAHIT can solve many problem s for me. I told you right now that I do not have a developer (...) But the needs for 
developers  are huge! We need more modules to be developed on  DHIS2. For the record, WHO has created a module 
called “WHO Data Quality Tool ”. The module is now integrated which make s it possible to analyze the data on 
vaccination  and HIV/AIDS . So, if we have th e competence, we can go above vaccination  and HIV and integrate other 
areas not taken into account by WHO. So, we will ask WAHIT  to help us so that we can develop whichever add itional 
module needed to analyze our data .” Togo KI. 
Potential technical assistance alternatives  
With respect to the existence of potential  TA alternatives to WAHIT , opinions are divided  in the two countries . While 
some believe that alternatives exist, others believe that WAHIT is unique. Among the partners mentioned as potential 
alternatives, WHO is recognized for providing technical assistance, Global Fund for financial assistance, USAID for TA 
through its various projects and programs and the University of Oslo for DHIS2.  
The Ministry in charge of digital development in Burkina Faso is also mentioned as  a potential alternative or potential 
support for sustainability.  
"I told you, to my knowledge , most of the activities are P rojects -based . Partners c ome in to implement  their P rojects. They 
have areas which they support to be successful. The “REC” Project is an example. At the beginning the project was 
implemented without involving the MOH. Now as they are transferring the project to the MOH, they are supporting the  
management of the electronic registry. But this support is focused and specific . You also have "Measure Evaluation" which 
is establishing now. "Measure evaluation" will apparently support  the MOH  to acquire servers and others  computers . 
They are also planning to  support the MOH  in the interoperability of DHIS2 , which would allow different databases to 
communicate with DHIS2. But these supports are “sporadic ” and not planned to last over the time.” Burkina Faso  KI.  
33|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  The respondents see WAHIT as a unique support to DHIS2. According to most of the KIs, it would be difficult to have 
technical assistance similar to what WAHIT is offering in the field of computer science wit h as much control of DHIS2.  
 "In fact, the particularity of WAHIT is their “mastery ” of DHIS2. I'm talking about IT and interoperability with other 
applications. Up to today, personally, I am impressed by they work on  DHIS2. I'm not sure that in Francophon e Africa 
there are other structures comparable to WAHIT.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
In Togo, WAHIT supported the MOH is resolving specific issues , including the deployment of two servers . 
"... we had acquired two servers, and these servers were  “dormant” in the warehouse. W e did not know what to do 
because we have no technical staffs to deploy the servers. During one meeting , we were informed that WAHIT's team  is 
visiting Togo . We expressed our needs and by now our servers are running. ” Togo KI  
WAHIT  is recognize d as a solid TA option  by almost all KIs. The KIs did not hesitate to  emphasize all of the advantages 
of WAHIT from  its supranational nature , the composition of its team to its mode of operation.  
"WAHIT as an option is very effective for us as they accomp any us in the implementation . They do not come to 
implement and then leave .” Burkina Faso  KI. 
The uniqueness  of WAHIT, according to the KIs, is its supranational nature . This allows transfer of knowledge and skills 
as well as  experience s and lessons learned. WAHIT brings its TA to countries with the same challenges  and difficulties 
and therefore provides a  huge opportunity for  sharing best practices.  WAHIT's approach is recognized as unique, new 
and beneficial to HIS stakeholders.  WAHIT has a  multidisciplinary team in technology with proven skills/expertise and a 
good knowledge of the health sector in West Africa . 
"Frankly, as I told you, their approach is really new. Their approach is new and very beneficial because they do not need 
to rely o n external expertise to come and do the stuff. With other partners, when you express your needs, even if they 
accept  to support , maybe it is financial support or they will be hiring  a cabinet to come and do the work, which is not the 
case for WAHIT. Becaus e they are people who are involved, they work in a field that talks about health, so they master 
the concepts  and their applications  (....), in any case, I find that WAHIT ’s approach is really new and unique. ” Burkina 
Faso KI. 
Most of the respondents in Bu rkina Faso also emphasized the responsiveness of WAHIT to requests for assistance.  
They were appreciative of the  procedures  in place for requesting TA , the availability of the team , their promptness to 
respond to requests and the skills transfer approach  during the technical assistance.  
"In fact, I need to insist on  how easy it is to ask for their assistance. In fact, they are cordially -available . They are always 
willing to explore the best mechanisms to get their technical assistance. If it has to be for malized, they tell you how to do 
it. If it does not need too, they'll help you. I would  say, they maintain friendly relationship with different actors .” Burkina 
Faso KI. 
The KIs in both countries also suggested additional  services to be offered by WAHIT to aid sustainability . This includes 
support ing the  countries in their capacity building plans to be able to adapt to changing environments . For example, 
WAHIT should consider t raining the local staffs in the “ development of applications/modules ” to be integrate d into 
DHIS2.  WAHIT should initiate a platform for sharing  experiences, lessons learned and good practices among ECOWAS 
countries. It would  also be beneficial to set -up a meeting space for sharing good practice s and experience s in each 
country.  
Perception of  WAHIT technical assistance    
At the time of the evaluation, WAHIT had already been contacted, at least twice, by the MOHs in both countries 
(Burkina Faso and Togo ) for technical assistance . The requests were essentially focused on supporting the MOH in both  
34|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  countries to identify various challenges and needs  their HIS are facing but also provide on-site technical assistance and 
training. A workplan/ timeframe for TA activities to be provided by WAHIT has ev en been d eveloped in Burkina Faso.   
“We organized a meeting with various  stakeholders to identify our challenges and needs. Following th e meeting, we 
requested technical assistance from WAHIT . Their technical team came to Ouagadougou and together we identified what 
WAHIT c ould do and what would need additional support (that WAHIT could not do) . Then we developed a workplan 
with clear timeframe which we are implementing now . For the meantime, under WAHIT, I don’t think there is any 
support in terms of equipment and infrastructure; it is mainly in terms of expertise and training – that’s all.” Burkina Faso  
KI 
WAHIT  has been training stakeholders  in Burkina Faso in “system s administration ” and software installation , server 
configuration and installation , data backup system, development of specific queries and application s in the context of 
rapid SMS , database interoperability and IT security. Similarly, the DHIS2 technical team of Burkina Faso received 
capacity building for API implementation. Therefore, o ne of the key successes of WAHIT is the variety and specificity of 
its technical assistance while building the capacity of the beneficiaries. Many KIs in Burkina Faso were very appreciative 
of WAHIT’s approach to provide solution to IT current issues while  building the capacity of the stakeholders.  
Another positive characteristic of WAHIT that was mentioned by the KIs is the flexibility of requesting  technical 
assistance . The system developed and implemented in Burkina Faso seem s to be very well developed  and appreciated by 
HIS officials . According  to the KIs, all requests are developed and submitted online (form s are available online)  by HIS 
staffs. The  MOH approves and sends/submits them to WAHO  and thereafter WAHIT  reaches out to the requestors.  
“It is w orth saying there is lot of flexibility  with WAHIT . We recently submitted a simple request to  WAHO , with the 
Minister’s signature. (….) and WAHIT’s support was immediately aligned. In September 2018 for example, we will get 
the support for the operationali zation of DHIS2 and some of our systems ”.       
“I forgot to say that, what makes WAHIT the best  is, in addition to provide with the solution , they also teach you how to 
solve your future problem s. WAHIT shows us how to achieve results. Unlike others who come to give you a solution and 
do everything for you to go back to them in the future. That's really the advantage of WAHIT” Burkina Faso  KI. 
Should  Government s pay for WAHIT TA?  
Among the KIs in Burkina Faso, 60% recommended that international partners should be contacted to continue funding 
WAHIT ’s technical assistance. Partners  such as WHO, CDC, Global Fund , World Bank  are the ones often mentioned as 
they already have some HIS support activit ies. Since WAHIT  is a sub -regional structure, it would be appropriate that the 
technical assistance be ensured by the contributions from countries.  The KIs also shared the opinion that these  technical 
assistance services are expensive .  
“It is often related to insufficient funding or well, it is also related to prioritization. Technical Assistance and consultan ts 
cost money (…) International partners  such as WHO, CD C, the Global Fund have all planned to support the National 
Health Informa tion System, and finally the World Bank as well. I think the financial partners are there anyway”.  Burkina 
Faso KI 
On the other hand, 40% of the KIs are of the view that  the government could pay for the technical assistance, especial ly 
if the expertise re quested does not exist elsewhere and if it could improve data quality .  This would require 
strengthening advocacy with the governments  to make sure they understand the importance and urgency of HIS for 
their planning activities.    
35|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  “Well I think it is feasib le. But perhaps, before going into that direction, it would be interesting to showcase  the results of 
support provided by WAHIT. In case this expertise is not readily available at the national level, it can be taken into 
account in the national budget with out problem.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
Other participant s added:  
“Why not? If we can convince people, I think these are things that are feasible. Especially when you know the importance 
of data. You see for example, everybody is currently talking of malaria incidence which is not decreasing. But this might be  
largely related to the deficiencies on the data.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
Request for WAHIT ’s technical assistance in the future  
KIs with and without prior knowledge, unanimously sa id they would ask for  WAHIT ’s support in HIS development.   
“In any case, as long as they give us the opportunity, we would always contact  them, because the HIS is very dynamic  and 
in constant evolution, so we will really always need them.” Burkina Faso  KI.  
Electronic data collection is a fast -expanding field, especially with applications eHealth , and the deployment of 
telemedicine applications that require totally innovative teleconfe rencing equipment, is often mentioned to justify future 
requests for WAHIT's TA.  However, the greatest concern remains the interoperability of systems allowing data 
exchange between  applications. KIs also expressed expecting a lot of support from WAHIT in the improvement of data 
quality .  
“Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes at the moment we need them, as I said, because we need capacity building. How to integrate a 
DHIS application from the DHIS -integrated application, APIs, everything that is programming at the DHIS2 level to ensure 
interoperability between DHIS and other applications or to automate or improve DHIS2 dashboards, we need them.” 
Togo KI.  
WAHO provides financial and human resources support following WAHIT's provision of assistance. WAHIT has a team 
of specialists who are competent in the ir respective fields,  are available and have the ability to share their knowledge 
with local teams . Among the partners, WAHIT seems to be the only organization that has its own technicians who can 
be called upon on short notice for capacity building.  
“They are available, they are technically good too. They have the skills and we cannot hide that. Then, thirdly, it should be 
said that we felt a certain availability on their part during the training anyway. They wanted to give us as much 
satisfaction as poss ible, but they were limited by time.” Togo  KI. 
The majority of KIs are willing to recommend WAHIT to other countries or institutions, as WAHIT has helped them 
resolve issues related to HIS.  
“Of course , they trained us, they made us discover other things, many countries will necessarily be at our level or where 
we were. So, it's normal that we tell them to proceed and use WAHIT to move forward.” Togo  KI. 
The KIs believe that WAHIT could be beneficial  to other regions outside of  West Africa. The positive exp erience with 
WAHIT ’s employees  was integral to forming that positive opinion . The institutional anchoring to WAHO and the 
operating method makes  even those  who are  unaware of WAHIT very positive and optimistic.  
 “Of course, of course ! when we exchange with our colleagues from other countries, we see that we are having the  same 
realities, however, we don’t have the same opportunities . We are often asked how we managed to overcome  some IT 
challenges . We often say that we received technic al assistance from this  partner and or that partner , so now with the 
experience we acquired from WAHIT, we are trying to share with them  (…)”. Burkina Faso  KI.  
36|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  Comparison of WAHIT  TA to other TA models  
Satisfaction with WAHIT ’s achievements  prompt ed KIs to say that WAHIT's technical assistance is better and above all 
others. The results of WAHIT's technical support are tangible and the satisfaction of the KIs is also reinforced by the 
fact that they are themselves “actors” of the TA.  
"I think it's above  the all, isn’t it? Without being hypocritical, I think it is better. It's better than the others because the 
results are palpable. When you do something by yourself you jump immediately on different aspects and services that you 
can offer.” Burkina Faso  KI   
WAHIT ’s methods include organizing a  specific orientation during their technical assistance . They have a  sub-regional 
expertise training with operating methods far better than many other assistance services. The modalities for activating 
TA and assistance in identifying needs are simple and  highly appreciated. In addition, it is a competent team with 
multidisciplinary experts made available to countrie s. 
“What is interesting is that,  as far as WAHIT's assistance is concerned, there is really a specific orientation. It's pretty 
clear, you really have an idea of the skills of the people you're dealing with. And on the other hand, the modalities for 
activating th e assistance are fairly s imple. You can even work with the WAHIT team to define your needs and better 
formalize them. And on the other hand, when you receive assistance from a sub -regional body, let’s say, it is much better  
(…).” Burkina Faso  KI. 
Another distinctive aspect of WAHIT is the support it provides to make the beneficiaries autonomous and independent. 
WAHIT TA  not only  supports implementation but also  works toward s the autonomy of technicians. This is different 
from many other consultants  who work without involving the local MOH stakeholders, perpetua ting the  dependence  on 
TA. WAHIT experts' knowledge of the sub -regional context is a definite comparative advantage over others.  
"No, the advantage of this type of assistance is that it is re ally context -based . Our countries have so many similarities that 
if the assistance comes  from a local  or regional , it became clearer . Sometimes we receive TA from other partners and we 
feel that it does not apply to  our own  system . Sometimes it takes time to those consultants to even understand our system 
before they  get ready to technically support us . So, for me , it is good to have this local and regional expertise .” Burkina 
Faso KI. 
The majority of KIs strongly  believe that WAHIT will be  succe ssful. Its model and approach which consists of meeting 
the units of the MOH, identify ing specific  needs, difficulties and then develop ing an action plan to tackle the issues  are 
unique . In addition, the availability and responsiveness of the WAHIT  members  make  the model an asset and an 
opportunity for HIS in the countries.  
"Well, (…) to be truthful , at the beginning when they came to meet us, I thought it was going to be just another… , eh; 
they come, meet , collect the information and disappear. But I realized that WAHIT  is really available  and very proactive. 
At the end, we were behind. Because as soon as you identify your needs  and submit your request , they try to analyze with 
you, they try to understand certain points, they ask for specificity and precis ion. Once those aspects are clear, you go to 
the operational planning and so -on. It's innovative, it's really innovative.”  Burkina Faso  KI. 
One of WAHIT's particularities is its sub -regional anchoring within WAHO, which is an asset for its success. This 
provides WAH IT with an overview of the countries that make up this organization and could potentially lead to the 
development of standards for all of the ECOWAS  countries.  
Challenges obtaining WAHIT technical assistance  
No major c hallenge was mentioned for obtaining technical a ssistance from  WAHIT. There is no administrative burden 
and the team can be contacted directly with requests.   
37|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  "No, personally , as I told you, they give us a form to complete . In reality, there is no administrative burden. This means, 
you have t he possibility to contact the team directly through the request at your disposal. So, frankly, it's more fluid ." 
Burkina Faso  KI. 
Some respondents noted  that the number of technicians within  WAHIT seems insufficient and therefore cannot cover 
all the count ries. This leads to a restriction in the duration of their intervention s as well as monitoring  of ongoing 
activities or intermittent interruptions.  
"Well, the WAHIT ’s staffs are  overwhelmed  (…). Sometimes we have the impression that they are understaffed and 
therefore struggle to follow up on  everything we do together . They should work with other stakeholders on the ground. 
Otherwise, of course it will be a good opportunity to work with them to d evelop and standardize the Health Information 
System.” Burkina Faso  KI.  
For all the respondents , the challenge will be how to ensure sustainability  of WAHIT’s interventions . To overcome this 
potential challenge, they mentioned the support of WAHO, WHO, UE MOA and country -governments  to mobilize the 
necessary resources.  
KIs suggested that WAHIT should  make itself known to partners, show them the services they have to offer  and their 
skills. WAHIT could visit the countries and assess the situation in terms of information systems to better understand the 
challenges faced in these countries .  They can the n organize training s or workshops so that they have more regional  
visibility .  
Institutional anchoring and partnership  
Advantages of WAH O’s supervision of WAHI IT  
WAHIT's affiliation to WAH O is, according to all the respondents ( 31/32) in Burkina Faso and Togo, an asset and an 
opportunity that benefits WAHIT and facilitates the sustainability of its activities . WAHO already has collaborative 
relationships and financial partners hips that may be beneficial to WAHIT.  
"This is an excellent decision  as it is carried by an organization that has the legitimacy and recognition of the Countries 
and Governments . With WAHO's senior decisio n-makers and health Ministers, they have a general assembly where they 
make decisions; meaning that if WAHO makes decisions, it is the countries that make decisions." Togo  KI 
"It should  even a requirement because countries unfortunately are isolated in ter ms of information systems. However, in 
the event of an epidemic and major problems, the response must be global and sub -regional, so it is the in -country 
integration of these Information Systems that should be led by WAHO  (…)”. Burkina  Faso KI.  
WAHIT , for some respondents , should be the technical arm of health information systems in West Africa and endeavor 
to ensure that all countries reach the same level through experience sharing.   
Advantages of the WAHO/USAID/Palladium partnership   
According to KIs, the advantage of this partnership is first and foremost, “mutualization ” at all levels; the sharing of 
knowledge, resources and experience. Partners support HIS  in terms of design and IT equipment as well. The partners 
will each bring on board their ow n experience and benefit from each other's experience. WAHO's good field 
knowledge, USAID's extensive presence in Africa and Palladium’s technical  expertise make this consortium a solid entity. 
It makes it possible to bring together  many resources  for impr ovement s, funding and technical support. Each partner 
brings to the table its own specialty  that allows the consortium to be viable. As one participant said: 
"The consortium allows the partners and beneficiaries to  share resource s, because if we intervene separately, the risk of 
duplicating is very high . Whereas a wide partnership like this allows on the one hand to pool resources, to be much more  
38|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  efficient and on the other hand to ensure the quality of the  TA. If the partners  are truly engaged for the long time, this 
could eventually lead to sustainability. And we also think if there are many partners  around the table, in case one or two 
withdraw, there will always be one or two more who will continue the TA . Since this activity is  implemented through 
WAHO, which is a sub -regional organization composed of different WA governments, it possible that at some point the 
various governments would eventually bear the costs inherent in th e TA.” Burkina Faso  KI. 
Some respondents believe this is an opportunity that WAHO must seize to consolidate its regional position as 
information is strategic and fundamental for decision making . However, some participants believe that since the HIS 
issue is quite broad and involv es several partners and areas, especially management of epidemics such as Ebola, it would 
be wise to open up the consortium further to make it a regional partnership with other stakeholders  supporting the 
health sector . 
Future Challenges for Governments and WAHO  
The challenge for the governments will be to maintain and sustain the TA provided by WAHIT after the project ends. 
Many KIs recommended that the WA governments and WAHO should start integration of health information systems  
by strengthen ing the national countries in IT and management of information systems .  The respondents also 
recommend ed the establishment of a “meta -database ” for the sub -region  with an integrated routine data collection and 
disease  surveillance  system . The c hallenge for WAHO is to continue to be responsive to national requests and issues . 
WAHO should be strategic in analyzing the real and specific needs per country before developing  a global strategic 
approach for TA . Such a global strategic approach should obviously integrate all aspects related to the management of 
human resources at both country and regional levels, hence the importance of creating a “regional pool of experts” with 
the highest knowledge of the WA environment. The KIs also recommended that WAHO designates local focal points  
per country . One key and repeated point  discussed during this study is the sustainability of the TA. One KI suggested 
that WAHO should take advantage of the ongoing WAHIT technical assistance to set up a pool of IT specialists who 
would support the  private pharmaceutical industries , therefore generating financial resources for the organization . 
"(…) I guess these issues were discussed before  starting WAHIT . Certainly, the TA provided  is great and at the right 
direction. Good! But the eternal  question of sovereignty, autonomy and auto -financing  is still there . Will WAHIT maintain 
its activities if there is no fund from USAID? Will ECOWAS countries eventually mobilize their internal  resources and take 
over to mitigate the  dependence?  The challenge of being able to survive after USAID funding ends.” Burkina Faso  KI 
Another recommendation is to coordinate with the governments and ensure that the HIS staffs are motivated to remain 
and work for the MOH. Then the transfer of competences and  skills would enable local teams to take charge of the 
management and administration of HIS  within a constant evolving environment.  
“I think that the transfer of competence and skills is more important than punctually resolving occurring  problems and 
then leaving. In Africa, we say I would rather prefer to be taught to fish than receiving  fish every time I need to eat.” Togo 
KI.   
39|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
Conclusion  
The Health Information System of Burkina Faso and Togo are all designed around DHIS2 with different experiences; 
Burkina Faso introduced DHIS2 in2013 and Togo more recently  in 2017. However, the challenges in both countries in 
terms of digital HIS are simi lar in several respects and can be summarized as follows:  
 Data quality (completeness, promptness, consistency , etc.); 
 Multiplicity of data sources ; 
 Insufficient human resources in quantity and in quality ; 
 Inadequate data analysis/use of data ; 
 Insufficient funding for HIS ; 
 Insufficient infrastructure and equipment (computers, servers, software, maintenance problems, data security, 
electricity, internet connection , etc.) 
  
WAHIT is now well known in both countries with a high level of satisfaction. The first experiences of technical support 
were very well appreciated and the WAHIT model seems to convince partners who find it a viable option that they 
would be willing to not only use  in the future but also recommend to other colleagues /countries  outside West Africa. 
WAHIT's anchoring within WAHO is a major asset and a guarantee of success because it automatically benefits from 
WAH O's credit and audience. A few concerns about WAHIT's interv entions are related to sustainability . It is not yet 
certain in both countries how WAHIT’s successes could be maintained after the project ends.  
 
Specific Recommendations  
● Use multiple avenues to inform different stakeholders of what WAHIT is, what it can do, and how international 
partners and countries can tap into the technical assistance the team may provide. This could include meetings that 
WAHO has already scheduled in the countries and/or joining local HIS task forces;  
● Engage more senior health officials in the management of data quality is sues; 
● Develop and standardize the Health Information System across E COWAS countries. This would enable the 
implementation of health system metadata within the WAHO space and provide a global response to an outbreak 
by making available timely  and relevant i nformation  to the national and regional decision -makers; 
● Create a platform for promoting and sharing good practices/experiences among ECOWAS countries ; 
● Promote the interoperability of the different existing systems through the development of specific applications which  
capitalize /computerize  all data in a single database.  
● Provide more consistent training s with tutorial guides  and give recognition through  awarding official  certificate s. 
●  
● Review the duration of field interventions to allow sufficient time for  adequate skill s transfer and/or problem s 
resolution ; 
● Reinforce  capacity building in IT security, maintenance, internet connectivity,  and data hosting in the  countries ; 
● Broaden the range of activities beyond TA and have a holistic view of the health information system ranging from 
data collection, administration and management to integrati on of infrastructure and equipment (computers, servers, 
etc.)  
40|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  ● Once the technical area of support is identified, one way to organize the WAHIT TA is to start with a s hort-term 
TA visit, followed by intermittent visits as needed. Additionally, p rovid ing remote assistance to ensure smooth 
implementation of recommendations and know -how transfer.  
● Create a regional “pool” of trainers and TA which WAHO would tap on whenever needs are;  
● Appoint ‘local -in-country focal points” for WAHO and WAHIT;  
● Regularly (at least once a year) host a regional meeting of IT and HIS partners to discuss issues, challenges and 
lessons learned;  
● WAHIT should coordinate and be member of all the exist ing partnerships and “taskforces” at the country and 
regional levels.  
  
 
 
 
 
  
41|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT    
42|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  ANNEXES  
Annex 1 List of respondents per Country   
43|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT  Annex 2 – Mapping of Research Questions, Instrument Design , and Type of Study 
Participant  
 
 
  
44|   WAHIT POR MIDLINE REPORT   
Annex 3 – Instruments Use d 