 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 72  
 
Big Data and Urban 
Transportation in India: A 
Bengaluru Bus Corporation 
Case Study  
 
VANYA RAKESH, RICHARD HEEKS , 
SUMANDRO CHATTAPADHYAY & 
CHRISTOPHER FOSTER  
 
 
2018  
 
 
 
ISBN:  978-1-905469 -73-4 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www. gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
 
Educators ’ Guide from : 
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/educators -guide/    
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background and Actors  ................................ ................................ .............  3 
B1. BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  3 
B2. MAIN ACTORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
C. Components of the Big Data System  ................................ .........................  5 
D. System Implementation  ................................ ................................ .........  11 
E. System Value  ................................ ................................ ..........................  12 
F. Conclusions  ................................ ................................ .............................  15 
F1. BIG DATA A ND THE POLITICS OF TRANSPORTATION  ................................ ........................  17 
F2. BIG DATA-ASSOCIATED CHANGES IN LOCUS OF POWER  ................................ ..................  18 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  19 
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
1 
 Big Data and Urban Transportation in India: 
A Bengaluru Bus Corporation Case Study  
 
 
Vanya Rakesh  
Ex-Centre for Internet and Society, 
Bengaluru, India  
 Richard Heeks1 
Centre for Development Informatics, 
University of Manchester, UK  
Sumandro Chattapadhyay  
Centre for Internet and Society, Bengaluru, 
India  Christopher Foster  
Information School, University of Sheffield, 
UK 
 
2018  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
As cities grow, urban transportation is becoming an issue of increasing salience.  
Simultaneously, big data systems are being introduced into urban transport.  This paper 
analyses the early days of the big data system introduced by India’s Bengaluru Metrop olitan 
Transport Corporation , which runs the city’s 6,000 -plus buses.  This has three main 
components: automated vehicle tracking and electronic ticketing machines which generate 
gigabytes of data per day, and a linked passenger information system with mob ile app.  Field 
interviews and document analysis were used to assess the system.  
 
Only an early, partial and contingent assessment can be given because the system ha d only 
been implemented for little over a year.  It does work in terms of gathering data and 
informing both management and passengers, though there are some operational flaws still 
to be ironed out.  Substantive contribution of tactical and strategic value has yet to be seen: 
it seems easier to apply data -intensity to operational than higher -level managerial 
processes.  However, there is already a sense in which big data is changing both the image 
of the organisation, and the “imaginary” of politicians and m anagers: the new view of urban 
transport systems that big data makes visible.  As a result of the latter, plans for removal of 
bus conductors and of layers of middle management are well advanced.  
 
We also see signs of big data enabling shifts in power: fro m labour to management, from 
middle to top management, and potentially towards those with data -related capabilities.  
There is some greater transparency of organisational activities to the general public, but 
wider transparency awaits full and sustained op ening of transport data to other users.  
 
 
                                                      
1 Corresponding author : richard.heeks@manchester.ac.uk  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Bengaluru – capital of Karnataka state in India – is a city of ten million people, growing fast 
and facing severe urban transport problems: since 2001 more than five million vehicles have 
been added to the city’s road and average traffic speeds have droppe d from 33kph to less 
than 5kph (ET 2017).  Buses are a key part of the urban transport architecture and 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC)  has more than 6,000 buses and 
nearly 35,000 employees.  Every day it carries more than five million passenger journeys 
over more than 2,000 routes and 8,000 bus stops, collects over US$500,000 in revenue, and 
its buses travel more than 1.2 million kilometres (BMTC 2017a).  
 
Such an operation requires a large number of operational, tactical and strategic d ecisions, 
and generates huge amounts of data which could be used to guide that decision -making.  
Historically, that data has not been captured or has been captured very inefficiently using 
human -based or paper -based systems.  With growing size and complexi ty creating 
increasing decision -related problems, in May 2016, BMTC launched its Intelligent Transport 
System (ITS) ; a project initially conceived in 2012 and beginning implementation in 2013 .  
The ITS project involves integrated implementation of over 10, 000 I nternet -enabled 
electronic ticketing machines, and over 6,400 online vehicle tracking units , at an initial five -
year cost of around US$1.2m (Akshatha 2015).  
 
For the first time, this has enabled capture and use of very large amounts of daily data in 
digital format.   The aim was to create a smart transport system  for real -time tracking of 
buses as well as of passenger trips .  It had an internal purpose of helping BMTC managers 
make more  data -intensive  decisions : e.g. operational decisions around cash fl ow, and more 
tactical decisions  regarding planning of bus routes and schedules .  And it had an external 
purpose of enabling passengers to make more data -intensive decisions about journey 
planning.  Such applications also have wider economic and social valu e: 
“For public bus services, dissemination of accurate information regarding current bus location, arrival 
time at bus stops, etc. to the traveler will help to reduce the uncertainty and waiting time involved in 
the use of bus service system and enhance ef ficiency. Improvements in service efficiency and 
reduction of waiting time will attract more passengers to this means of public transport, thus easing 
the traffic burden on the roads” (Vanajakshi et al. 2016:80).  
 
To investigate in more detail, in 2016, au thor Vanya Rakesh undertook a field study of this 
new big data system just a few months after implementation.  Alongside direct observation 
of the system in action and analysis of available documentation, the study involved nine 
interviews with staff at bo th strategic and operational levels in BMTC, with technical 
contractors implementing ITS, and with external experts and advisers involved with 
development of urban transportation in Bengaluru.  This was followed in mid -2017 by 
analysis of additional docume ntation updating on performance of the system just over a 
year since implementation.  
 
In what follows, the main human actors and technical components of the system will be 
outlined, its value at various levels of the organisation will be assessed, and conc lusions will 
be drawn, particularly about the relationship between big data, politics and power.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
3 
 B. Background and Actors  
 
B1. Background  
 
Bengaluru has a long history of association with ICTs dating back to development of the 
global South’s first analogue computers in the Indian Institute of Science in 1952 (Heeks 
2009).  In transport, there were some internal administrative computing applic ations; for 
example use of digital information systems for inventory control in the Karnataka State 
Road Transport Corporation  from the early 1980s.  During the 1990s and stretching onwards 
into the 2000s and 2010s, bus -related data was not collected in re al time.   Conductors used  
paper tickets (see Figure 1) and paper  time sheets, where the arrival and departure time of 
buses at major bus depots  were documented by the controller concerned .  They also 
maintained daily trip -sheet data on ticket sales includi ng the temporal pattern of sales; 
again on paper.  There was no data gathered on bus location and hence no way to inform 
passengers about journeys other than the published timetables.  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Paper -Based  Bus Ticketing  
Source: Ramakrishnan (2015)  
 
 
This situation was the current one in Bangalore up the advent of ITS.  However, there were 
experiments with use of ICTs:  
 A GPS -/satellite communications -based system was installed in Bengaluru in 1999 but 
only for use on the 200 or so buses hired from priv ate operators.  The system did not 
work well: it was offline so data had to be physically retrieved from each bus.  Reports 
arrived two -three days after journeys had taken place, and were thus of no use for real-
time tracking (Prakash 2008 ).  The system wa s abandoned, having cost around 
US$120,000.  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
4 
  In the early 2000s, there  were similar GPS-based pilots which did not sustain in other 
parts of Karnataka state.  
 In 2004, BMTC issued a letter of intent to install online GPS -based tracking for its buses, 
seeking  to overcome limitations of the earlier offline deployment.  However, the 
satellite links often broke down within an urban environment due to line -of-sight 
obstruction from trees, buildings, flyovers, etc; and the data provided was not linked to 
bus schedu les (Prakash 2008, Vanajakshi et al. 2016) .  Again, no real -time tracking was 
possible and this system was also abandoned, having cost around US$100,000.  
 Electronic ticketing machines were introduced by BMTC on a number of routes in 2008 
but were removed b y 2011 due to functionality problems (Ramakrishnan 2015).  
 In 2007, Mapunity (see below) launched the Bengaluru Transport Information System 
(BTIS)2, which aggregates video and mobile cell tower and other data to try to provide a 
comprehensive urban traffic  information system for individual citizens and city agencies.  
This system is still in operation.  
 In 2010, Mysore began implementation of an Intelligent Transport System, with initial 
implementation in 2012 and final completion only in late 2016 (Urs 2010 , Prasad 2012, 
Indian Express 2017).  
 
B2. Main Actors  
 
The main  actors involved with the Bengaluru ITS  big data platform are described below, 
indicating that this is a public -private partnership.  It was implemented on a build -operate -
transfer basis.  
 Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation3: a government agency that operates the 
public transport bus service in Bengaluru  and which  initiated the ITS project.  Within 
BMTC, there are different groupings, such as managerial staff; and also the bus driv ers 
and conductors who operate the services which are the subject of big data capture.  
 Trimax4: a private sector Indian company that provides a wide range of IT solutions and 
services.  The company has a track record in providing systems for public transpo rt 
operators across India in states including Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  It 
is the main implementer of ITS, having been awarded the project through an open 
tender process organised by BMTC in 2013.  
 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC): a multinatio nal consulting firm that provides services 
like audit and assurance.  They are consultants for BMTC for the ITS project, and look 
after the deliverables from Trimax, to ensure they are in compliance with the 
requirements of BMTC.  
 Mapunity Information Servi ces5: a private sector Indian company that develops 
geographic information systems and services primarily for public sector clients.  
Mapunity is a consultant for BMTC on ITS with respect to its implementation, and has 
also assisted in  drafting an open dat a policy for the project.  
 Passengers: the commuters who use the bus services and are also one of the intended 
beneficiaries of ITS.  
                                                      
2 See: http://www.btis.in/  
3See: http://mybmtc.com/  
4See: http://trimax.in/  
5 See: http://mapunity.com/  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
5 
 C. Components of the Big Data System  
 
ITS was custom -designed for BMTC to track buses and passenger ticketing , in order  to 
inform not only real -time information -sharing and decision -making, but also medium - and 
long -term planning of the public transport network. The ITS has fou r key technological 
components and is operated from a central  Control Room:  
 
Vehicle Tracking Sys tem (VTS):  comprises two further components : the vehicle tracking unit 
(VTU) and the Voice Kit. The GP RS-enabled VTU  (see Figure 2)  was developed by Trimax, and 
has been installed  near the driver’s seat  in every one of the more than 6,000 BMTC buses 
operat ing in the city.  It  shares real -time location data  every 10 seconds, along with vehicle 
number and shift number (of the driver and conductor of the bus concerned).  This short -
interval collection of data allows for analysis of the driving pattern, includi ng issues like 
skipping of bus stops and deviation from planned route, as well as indicating the traffic 
situation at the buses’ current location . 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Vehicle Tracking Units  
Source: BMTC https://twitter.com/BMTC_Bangalore/status/842619833938329600  
 
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
6 
 Examples of the dashboard displays available at the central Control Room are shown below 
including an overview of alerts about all buses covered by the system (Figure 3); more  
detailed drill -down to the level of individual crews (Figure 4); and more detailed drill -down 
to track an individual bus (Figure 5).  
 
 
 
Figure 3: Overview Dashboard of Alerts about Buses  
Source: Vanya Rakesh  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Drill -Down Data on Individual Bu s Crews  
Source: Vanya Rakesh  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
7 
  
 
Figure 5: Drill -Down Data on Individual Buses  
Source: Vanya Rakesh  
 
 
This tracking unit  transmits data via the mobile (GPRS) network  with an estimate that 
around 20GB of data is received daily by the central servers from the VTUs.  The VTU can be 
used by driver s to inform the Control Room in case of an emergency  but the Voice Kit – a 
microphone and speaker (see Figure 6) – supports two -way communication between the 
bus and the Control Room.  This enables the driver to speak with  the Control Room in case 
of an emergency like an accident or breakdown.  It also enables the  Control Room as well as 
the bus depot  (the major bus stations , of w hich there are just over 40 in the city)  to contact 
the bus driver if an alert is triggered such as skipping a bus stop, unauthorised stoppages, 
change in the route, speeding, etc.  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Bus Voice Kit  
Source: BMTC https://twitter.com/BMTC_Bangalore/status/842619833938329600  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
8 
 Electronic Ticketing System (ETS):  comprises two connected elements – the Electronic 
Ticketing Machines (ETM) and the Depot Application.   The ETM  (see Figure 7)  is used by the 
conductors to issue journey tickets to passengers, and it transmits thi s ticket data to the ITS 
every five  minutes via the mobile (GPRS) network.  It is EMV -compliant6 and allows for card -
based and other cashless transactions .  The data collected by the ETM includes the bus stop 
at which a particular ticket was issued, the ticket amount (proxy for destination bus stop), 
details of the bus, timestamp, etc.  The Depot Application is installed at al l bus depots  and it 
gathers inf ormation from both the ETM and VTU as well as top -down sources.  It can then 
generate information on the crew duty rota, the log sheet for the driver, kilometres 
travelled  and details about fuel usage, ticketing, etc.  This information is sent to the deskt op 
application at the ITS Control Room, which generates schedules and timetables.  This data is 
also fed into the ETM, which is used by the bus conductors and is issued when they begin 
their period of duty.  
 
 
 
Figure 7: BMTC Electronic Ticketing Machine  
Source: Ramakrishnan (2016b)  
                                                      
6EMV is a security framework and technical standard for  payment interaction between chip ped/smart 
payment  cards and payment devices  (EMV  stands for Europay, MasterCard, and Visa, the three companies that 
originally created the standard ). 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
9 
 Passenger Information System (PIS):  this is the bus location information system, powered 
by real -time data from  the VTS.  It provides information  about buses going from a particular 
stop/location:  the destination, the route via  which the bus will go, estimated time of arrival , 
etc (see Figure 8) .   Basic  PIS output can be found on display screens at all major bus 
stations.  It also feeds the mobile app (see next) and touch -screen kiosks which give bus 
times as per the basic disp lay but also trip -planner functionality as per the mobile app.  
 
 
 
Figure 8: Passenger Information System Display  
Source: Bhattacharya (2016a)  
 
BMTC Mobile Application7: this is an Android application available from the Google Play 
store. It is said to have a simple user interface that allows tracking of buses in real -time, 
including their estimated time of arrival at a specific bus stop  (see Figure 9).  The app also 
provides bus timetables, route maps and a trip planner (see also Figure 9).  The current  
number of downloads of the app is in the range 10 0,000 -500,000, with a 3.6 review average .  
The comments threads and responses from BMTC suggest the corporation  has been taking 
note of and responding to  some  feedback, with the ap p currently on version 2.8 .3. 
 
  
 
Figure 9: BMTC Mobile App  
Source: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bmtc.mybmtc  
                                                      
7See: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bmtc.mybmtc  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
10 
 ITS Control Room:  data from vehicle tracking and ticket sales are transmitted to servers – 
maintained by Trimax but owned by BMTC – located at the Karnataka State Data Centre .  
From there, data can be accessed at a number of locations but primarily at the ITS Control 
Room (see Figure 10).  T his is the 24/7 operations centre of the ITS, with a video wall 
consisting of six large LCD screens showing location information and other key monitoring 
and performance indicators  (see Figures 3 -5 above).  There is  space for up to twent y people 
including operators, technicians, and BMTC officials  (see Figure 11) .  The Control Room also 
has a two-way communication system with all buses, and thus functions as a point -of-
contact for emergency incidents.  
 
 
 
Figure 10: ITS Architecture8 
Sour ce: Mishra (2016)  
 
 
 
Figure 11: BMTC Control Room  
Source: BMTC (2017e)  
                                                      
8 MPLS: multi -protocol label switching; ILL: Internet leased lines;; P2P: peer -to-peer; WAN: wide area network  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
11 
 D. System Implementation  
 
There have been significant delays in ITS implementation – it was initially expected to go live 
in mid -2014 – but much of this may well be down to technical issues (Akshatha 2015, 
Bhattacharya 2016b)9.  One might have anticipated one cause of delays to be resistance 
from bus crews, yet managers interviewed claimed the system was easily and readily 
accepted by the workforce, who have undergone training sessions  on the new system (see 
Figure 12) albeit after rather than before installation of the ICT in some cases (Akshatha 
2016).  Lack of resistance is unexpected because BMTC staff strikes were a relatively regular 
occurrence during 2016 (Chatterjeel 2016) and 2 017 (Reddy 2017, The Hindu 2017).  And 
there has been reported concern from drivers and conductors about the surveillance that 
tracking systems provide e.g. in the sister implementation of ITS in Mysore (NITI 2015).  
 
 
 
Figure 12: ITS Bus Driver Training (Mysore)  
Source: NITI (2015)  
 
 
Direct interviews with bus crews and labour unions would be required to investigate this in 
detail but in none of the BMTC strike reports are ITS or its component technologies 
mentioned, and reports of bus crew interviews men tion complaints about malfunctioning of 
equipment rather than surveillance (Ramakrishnan 2016a).  Relevant factors here may be:  
a) Benefits to bus crews of the new system.  There is a saving of time and complexity at 
least for bus conductors given they now ju st have a single machine instead of many 
types of tickets, and they no longer need to complete trip -sheets (Ramakrishnan 2015).  
b) Potential disbenefits as yet unrealised.  Some of the surveillance capacities of the system 
may  not yet have been put into opera tion.  There is conflicting evidence here.  The 
interviewed depot manager (see below) claimed the system had reduced “ticketing 
pilferage” but it was unclear if this covered theft by bus crews.  And reports of 
conductors “booked” for allowing ticketless tr avel in February 2017 (BMTC 2017d) and 
report of a July 2017 strike relating to a conductor being suspended over not issuing 
tickets (The Hindu 2017), indicated this happened through oversight of human ticket 
inspectors rather than anything based on ITS/ET Ms. 
c) Potential disbenefits as yet unrecognised.  It may be that bus crews do not recognise 
that electronic ticketing is a first step towards driver -only buses: something which is 
already part of BMTC’s plans (Philip 2017a).  
                                                      
9 Techn ical and project management (procurement, financing, requirements) challenges were the main issues 
identified in the Mysore ITS implementation (Prasad 2012).  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
12 
  
There has been an admission of “ a lot of resistance” to ITS within the Corporation 
(Bhattacharya 2016b).  But this seems to have come more from the managerial level: 
something which may well have impacted the limited progress in terms of changes to 
managerial processes, as discussed next . 
 
 
E. System Value  
 
Value of ITS can be assessed at four levels:  
 
i. Technical Operations . The main ITS components that either gather or utilise big data were 
working but not yet fully working as intended:  
 A discussion with a manager  at Yelahanka bus depot indicated problems with the 
Vehicle Tracking System, but this was largely relating to the Voice Kit and poor sound 
quality that made two -way communication hard or impossible in some cases.   There was 
no direct evidence that VTUs themsel ves are not working following the switch from GPS 
to GPRS communication, though lack of GPRS signal availability in some parts of the city 
was identified as a problem in the Mysore ITS project (Prasad 2012).  
 Though the ETM system is operational – hop on a BMTC bus and you will see them in 
use – there are some problems.  Bus crew complain about short battery life, system 
crashes and connectivity errors with the electronic ticketi ng machines (Ramakrishnan 
2016a), and problems with the system have partly expla ined delays with introduction of 
smart card payment (The Hindu 2016).  
 The Passenger Information System public screen and kiosks  do operate in some 
locations.  They were praised by interviewed passengers for the assistance they provide, 
and comment in 2017 was seeking a roll -out of the system to individual bus stops rather 
than complaining about non -operation (Philip 2017b).  However, they  are not universally 
functional.  For example, in Domlur bus depot, three screen s and one kiosk had been 
installed, but n one were working at the time of a visit in 2016.  Figure 1 3 shows at the 
top the public display screens, and on the bottom the kiosk touch -screen which was 
frozen on this image.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
13 
  
 
 
 
Figure 13: Passenger Information System Display Examples  
Source: Vanya  Rakesh  
 
 The Mobile Application does in reality provide information about bus arrival times as per 
Figure 8 but the interface and usability are problematic.  On testing in 2016, the app 
begins by asking use rs which bus number they are interested in: not helpful for those 
who don’t already know the bus network.  The app did not give details on specific bus 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
14 
 routes, making it difficult to identify which buses to take e.g. for commuting.   Other 
reports indicate m issing buses and missing arrival time data (Akshatha 2016).   By mid -
2017, the app had been improved but problems still remained (CM 2017): it took a 
minute for the home screen to load; the Kannada language option leads back to English 
text; and a test of t he route planner found no record of the bus stop on the system even 
though it exists in reality, and that planning could only cope with a single bus linking two 
stops, not with a multi -bus journey; overall, “this app is incredibly buggy and slow”.  
Mid-2017 reviews of the app  (including a number of the four - and five -star reviews) also 
complain about lack of accuracy in te rms of bus locations and timing, and a more 
general review of such systems in India reports potential design -reality gaps:  
“The accuracy of arrival time prediction is poor, perhaps because of deficiencies in algorithms used for 
prediction.  In most cases, the details of the prediction algorithms are not available since they were 
implemented by an external agency.  Many of these implementati ons used methodologies developed for 
western countries that have homogenous traffic, which may not be suitable in the heterogeneous Indian 
traffic conditions.” (Vanajakshi et al 2016:21)10 
Operationally, then, the picture appears to be glass half -full, glas s half -empty.  A number of 
these problems may be teething troubles which will be resolved, and that are not 
unexpected in a system the size and complexity of ITS.  However, the persistence of some 
problems a year since implementation and the sense that BMT C may be addressing smaller 
issues but not larger ones (CM 2017) gives some cause for concern.  
 
ii. Operational Management .  Operational management means, for example, management 
at the level of individual bus depots.  The ITS dashboard is available to man agers here with 
the intention that they are now able to monitor each and every bus in real -time, keep a 
track of revenue generated each day via the ETM and conduct audits for verification , and 
also keep a better record of duty schedules for all the employe es.  The first was not 
previously possible and the latter two were previously done manually.  The manager at one 
depot reported the following:  
 Introduction of the ETM had made end-of-day audit and cash reconciliation  easier, and 
had led to a reduction in r evenue discrepancies, and a reduction in the number of cases 
of “ticketing pilferage” . 
 Traffic police would previously issue fines – which the depot manager had to handle – 
for claimed traffic violations  by bus drivers .  In a number of cases these were kno wn to 
be fake but there was no mechanism e.g. to check whether a bus was in fact speeding, 
or was stopped as a result of an accident.  Though imperfect and not providing all 
necessary data (e.g. it cannot unequivocally tell if a bus has jumped a red light) , data 
from the Vehicle Tracking System allowed some cross check.  As a result – perhaps the 
perception as much as the reality of vehicle tracking – the number of fake fines issued 
was said to have significantly reduced.  
 There are problems with the ETM sys tem but it was claimed that bus crews would try to 
refuse to work if the system is not available for use on a particular day.  
This represents just one view at one moment in time, but it does suggest there have been 
some changes at the level of front -line m anagement in BMTC.  
 
                                                      
10 The report goes on to note the complexity and challenges faced by a prototype application that s ought to 
provide more accurate arrival time prediction based on those “heterogeneous Indian traffic conditions”.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
15 
 iii. Tactical Management .  This means, for example, management of routing and 
scheduling.  At the time of the 2016 field study, these other uses of the big data seemed to 
be potential rather than reality.  For example, there were aspira tions among BMTC 
interviewees to use the data to rationalise routes, schedules and bus operations in order to 
better respond to daily and seasonal patterns of demand for public transport , and to 
enhance efficiency in the operation and management of crews.  The potential is there.  It is 
claimed that even by 2012, Mysore’s ITS application had cut 28 bus crew and seven buses 
(from an application across 400 buses) from the schedule through route optimisation based 
on ITS data (NITI 2015).  And it was claimed t hat by 2016 ITS -based route optimisation and 
reduction of staffing and overtime in Mysore had cut annual operational costs by 
US$900,000 (Indian Express 2017).  But this had not happened in Bengaluru in 2016 and 
there have been no subsequent reports of thi s during 2017.  Indeed, only five schedules 
were changed during 2016 -17 compared with an average of 176 being changed in previous 
years suggesting, if anything, a negative relation between the arrival of big data and re -
scheduling (BMTC 2017c).  
 
iv. Strate gic Performance .  Finally, one may judge ITS at the level of strategic contribution.  
ITS may have won several awards (BMTC 2017b) and is certainly providing additional 
functionality to BMTC at lower levels.  But, as yet, this has not been seen in terms of  
broader urban transportation goals.  We can judge on the basis of the four BMTC goals to 
which ITS was intended to contribute (Mishra 2016, BMTC 2017c):  
 Service reliability: 14% of services were cancelled in 2016 -17 compared to an average 
6.5% in the prev ious five years . 
 Citizen centricity: PIS and the mobile app have been steps forward but they are not fully 
operational or effect ive as yet in providing information and journey planning support for 
travellers.  Passenger -journey numbers were down by about 2 00,000 per day  in 2016 -17 
compared to the previous year, so aspirations of helping to move more passengers onto 
the buses were not yet realised.  
 Revenue management: there is little internal data on this but overall passenger revenue 
fell by 8% during 2016 -17 compared to an average 10% growth over the previous five 
years, and as noted above there is a mixed picture of impact at the micro -level of 
“ticketing pilferage” . 
 Organisational capabilities: fleet utilisation fell below 90% for the first time in 2016 -17 
while costs per km were at their highest -ever level.  
There are of course many internal and external factors other than ITS that contribute 
towards organisation -wide performance, but this does show a lack of any short -term impact 
of ITS  on strategic performance indicators.  It also suggests a lack of contribution as yet to 
even wider measures of urban transportation relating to journey times, pollution, etc.  
 
 
F. Conclusion s 
 
Any conclusions about this big data system must be contingent: field interviews were 
conducted only a few months after the system went live in 2016, and later data was 
analysed little more than a year after implementation.  Given the scale of investment and 
operational functionality, it is highly unlikely that the sys tem will be abandoned – one 
commentator notes “ITS has become too big a project to fail” (Bhattacharya 2016b) – and Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
16 
 more likely that it will gather operational momentum and impact over coming years.  There 
are a number of operational shortcomings identifie d but by, say, 2020 those could well be 
just a distant memory.  
 
There have been challenges with the technical implementation of this big data project, and 
socio -technical change to administration and management has really barely begun: bus 
crew, administra tive and managerial staff are in process of making the changeover from 
decades of paper -based working to digital -/data -intensive processes.  One clear conclusion 
is that big data systems take a long time to implement; perhaps particularly in the public 
sector and certainly particularly for large and more complex systems involving thousands of 
material objects and tens of thousands of people.  Pure technical implementation has taken 
several years, and integration into – and revision of – BMTC business proces ses is going to 
take several years more.  What is provided here can therefore only be seen as an early and 
interim assessment.  
 
In terms of value, ITS is largely potential rather than actuality.  Some operational benefits 
have been seen though these unders hoot full value, and tactical and strategic value – at 
least in overt terms – is yet to be seen.  But it will be at least a year or two before one can 
assess the success or failure of big data in relation to these higher -level values.  At present, 
then, mu ch of the data gathered is what Gartner (n.d.) call “dark data ... the information 
assets organizations collect, process and store during regular business activities, but 
generally  fail to use for other purposes”.  Put another way, the organisation in many  
processes waits at the start of the information value chain (see Figure 14), waiting to turn 
the data it has into meaningful information, decisions, actions and results.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: The Information Value Chain  
Source: Heeks (201 8) 
 
 
Notwithstanding the recency of the application, we can still try to make an assessment – 
drawing on earlier work in India’s electricity sector (Sengupta et  al 2017) – of the relation 
between big data, power and politics; looking at two aspects.  
 
  
 
Data  
(capture, input, 
process, store)  
 
Information  
(output)  
 
Knowledge  
 
Decision  
 
Action  
 
 
Result  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
17 
 F1. Big Data and the Politics of Transportation  
 
First, looking at the broader politics of BMTC, it is regarded as a heavily -politicised 
organisation: “ a corporate  entity only by name ” (Menezes 2017b) and one that is dogged by 
claims and perceptions of corruption across all levels (e.g. Ramakrishnan  2016a, Fatima & 
Natrajkumar 2017, Menezes 2017b).  In such circumstances, organisational image will be 
seen as importa nt by senior officials and there is certainly a sense of the big data system 
being applied as veneer.  
 
The focus has been on the external interface of the organisation and public relations rather 
than changes to internal decision -making: lots of media -related promotion about ITS and 
attention to the (albeit still functionally -challenged) PIS and mobile app.  This is of a piece 
with other changes such as free wi -fi or smart cards or better buses on routes used by 
wealthier passengers which are seen as a) pla ying to the politically -vocal middle classes 
rather than more marginalised groups; b) at most using big data to address petty front -line 
corruption while doing nothing to address deeper -rooted and higher -level corruption.  Such 
innovations are also aimed a t political decision -makers outside BMTC in the Karnataka State 
legislature, seeking to present the image of a modern and progressive organisation.  ITS and 
the image it helps create may thus have made some contribution to the decision in 2017 for 
the firs t large -scale investment in new buses for at least three years: with 3,000 being 
purchased (Fatima & Natrajkumar 2017, Menezes 2017b).  
 
As well as the image, we can say that big data has also changed the “imaginary” within 
BMTC: it changes what is “visible ” within the city, and to whom (Taylor & Broeders 2015).  In 
particular we can see that the daily operations of the bus fleet and bus crews were largely 
opaque to management prior to ITS, but they are becoming increasingly visible and thus 
changing the per ceived picture of BMTC that managers hold in their heads.  Big data is thus 
changing the landscape of what is seen to be possible within the organisation.  Alongside 
the investment in new buses (which probably relates to the imaginary of politicians as muc h 
as managers), signs of this are also reflected in:  
 Revival of plans for driver -only buses – a change  trialled in the 1990s but then 
abandoned – but now seen as possible  by managers; something they  specifically link to  
the advent of ITS (Philip 2017a).  
 Stripping out a management layer: removing the five divisional offices with 400 staff 
that sit between the central office and the depots.  Although planned for early 2017 it 
was unclear at the time of writing if this change had occurred.  However, the 
restru cturing was seen to only be feasible with the arrival of ITS:  
 “The transition to a two -tier administrative system will be smooth, thanks to the now -functional 
Information [ sic] Transport System, says Ekroop Caur [ BMTC’s Managing Director ]. ‘While bus rout es and 
schedule, procurement, accounts and labour welfare were discussed at the central office, BMTC's 
divisional office was largely responsible for supervision and disciplinary enquiries. Now, we can track the 
movement of buses and real -time data on ticke t fare collection through  technology,’ she explained” 
(Menezes 2017a).  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
18 
 F2. Big Data -Associated Changes in Locus of Power  
 
Second, we can assess shifts in the locus of power in and around BMTC.  
 
As seen in the Indian electricity case study (Sengupta et al. 2017), there are already signs of 
an upward shift in power from labour to management which we can judge in relation to 
three resource features of criticality, control and commutability ( ibid. ): 
 Criticality: bus crews remain critical to BMTC operations so little has changed here.  
 Control: the autonomy of bus crews has been significantly reduced with the advent of 
big data.  Their location, bus speed, following of route and schedule are all now 
trackable; and ticketing processes are similarly more control led via the ETM.  Of course, 
some prior autonomy may have been used to meet their own self -interests, but there is 
now significantly more management surveillance of bus crew activity.  
 Commutability: automation of operations is steadily eroding the role of and necessity for 
two-crew operations, and pressure for substitution of the conductor’s role with digital 
technology will continue to grow.  
 
There are also shifts in power from middle to central management.  Whether actually 
restructured yet or not, the wr iting is on the wall for divisional offices.  Big data systems 
enable central management to directly access performance data from the front -line of 
operations, and to automatically undertake and communicate performance management; 
obviating the need for in termediating management layers.  Within central management 
there will also be a shift towards those who manage and use big data such as the senior 
members of the central Control Room team, but only once big data starts to form a greater 
part of the manager ial decision -making processes within BMTC.  
 
In the electricity case study there was a clear shift in power from public to private sector; 
the latter represented by the big data system operator, which was a multinational IT firm.  
Such a shift is less clear  as yet in relation to ITS, where Trimax is less than 10% the size of 
BMTC.  Certainly there will be big data system capabilities which Trimax holds and BMTC 
does not, but ownership of data and systems is quite clearly in the hands of the 
Corporation11. 
 
Finally, we can consider power shifts between the Corporation and the general public and 
civil society.  Notwithstanding their flaws, PIS and the associated mobile app have resulted 
in some greater operational transparency: passengers can more readily unde rstand what 
BMTC is supposed to deliver; these technologies provide a greater public engagement with 
transport services; and there is at least the promise that passenger behaviour will be taken 
into account more in future planning.  Publicly -available high er-level performance data 
remains at an aggregated and annual level as it did in pre -ITS times, but this could change if 
the ITS dataset was opened up to public use.   There have been plans for BMTC to open up 
the real -time data, thus allowing individuals a nd organisations to make use of it (Akshatha 
2016, Bhattacharya 2016c).  Release of data was promised for June 2017 (ET 2017) but at 
the time of writing there was no visible sign of it.   
                                                      
11 There may be a wider story about shifting public/private sector boundaries, with BMTC being accused of 
increasingly acting like a private fir m, and with half of the new buses ordered being run on contract by private 
operators ( Fatima & Natrajkumar 2017).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
19 
 References  
 
Akshatha, M. (2015) BMTC’s new year gift to Bengaluru: In telligent Transport System , 
Citizen Matters , 22 Dec  http://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/bmtc -new -year -gift-to-
bengaluru -intelligent -transpor t-system -7966  
 
Akshatha, M. (2016) All you need to know about BMTC’s Intelligent Transport System , 
Citizen Matters , 26 May http://bengaluru.citizenmatters.i n/intelligent -transport -system -
bmtc -bangalore -8366  
 
Bhattacharya, A. (2016a) BMTC to go intelligent, will introduce vehicle tracking, electronic 
ticketing & passenger information systems , The Economic Times , 2 May 
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics -and-nation/bmtc -to-go-intelligent -will-
introduce -vehicle -tracking -electronic -ticketing -passenger -information -
systems/articleshow/52069334.cms  
 
Bhattacharya, A. (2016b) BMTC flags off intelligent transport system in low -key manner , The 
Economic Times , 25 May 
http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/technology/bmtc -flags -off-intelligent -
transport -system -in-low-key-manner/52435841  
 
Bhattacharya, A. (201 6c) BMTC plans an open data policy to boost its Intelligent Transport 
System , The Economic Times , 2 Jun 
http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/internet/bmtc -plans -an-open -data -policy -
to-boost -its-intelligent -transport -system/52547930  
 
BMTC (2017a) BMTC at a Glance , BMTC, Bengaluru  http://www.mybmtc.co m/bmtc_glance  
 
BMTC (2017b) Awards , BMTC, Bengaluru http://www.mybmtc.com/awards  
 
BMTC (2017c) Performance Indicator , BMTC, Bengaluru 
http://www.mybmtc .com/performance -indicator  
 
BMTC (2017d) Ticketless passengers penalized during the Month of February -2017 , BMTC 
News , 24 Mar http://www.mybmtc.com/news/t icketless -passengers -penalized -during -
month -february -2017  
 
BMTC (2017e) BMTC Intelligent Transport System , video, BMTC, Bengaluru 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sk2DdDjeSF8  
 
Chatterjeel, S. (2016 ) KSRTC, BMTC workers to go on indefinite strike from Monday , Times 
of India , 23 Jul http://timesofindia.in diatimes.com/city/bengaluru/KSRTC -BMTC -workers -to-
go-on-indefinite -strike -from -Monday/articleshow/53356334.cms  
 
CM (2017) One year later, BMTC’s updated ITS continues to disappoint , Citizen Matters , 24 
May http://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/one -year -later -bmtc -intelligent -transport -system -
continues -to-be-unintelligent -9308  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
20 
  
ET (2017) BMTC to open up transit data enabling entrepreneurs build mobility solutions , The 
Economic Times , 9 Jun http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/internet/bmtc -to-
open -up-transit -data -enabling -entrepreneurs -build -mobility -solutions/59064430  
 
Fatima, K. & Natrajkumar, N. (2017) Torn seats, failed brakes, broken windows, The News 
Minute , 16 May http://www.thenewsminute.com/article/torn -seats -failed -brakes -broken -
windows -what -ails-karnatakas -bmtc -buses -62100  
 
Gartner (n.d.) Dark Data , Gartner, Stamford, CT http://www.gartner.com/it -glossary/dark -
data/  
 
Heeks, R. (2009) The godfather of ICT4D, and ICT4D’s first computer , ICT4D Blog , 1 Jan 
https://ict4dblog.wordpress.com/2009/01/01/the -godfather -of-ict4d -and-ict4ds -first-
computer/  
 
Heeks, R. (2018 ) Information and Communication Technology for Dev elopment , Routledge, 
Abingdon, UK  
 
Indian Express (2017) Mysore's sustainable urban public transport shows the way , Indian 
Express , 1 Mar 
http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/2017/mar/01/mysores -sustainable -
urban -public -transport -shows -the-way-1576035.html  
 
Menezes, N. (2017a) Tech to make BMTC a mean machine , The Economic Times , 24 Jan 
http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/technology/tech -to-make -bmtc -a-mean -
machine -naveen -menezes -bengaluru/56746955  
 
Menezes, N. (2017b) What ails BMTC and what it must do to drive Bengaluru's future, The 
Economic Times , 24 Feb http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics -and-
nation/what -ails-bmtc -and-what -it-must -do-to-drive -bengalurus -
future/articleshow/57325264.cms  
 
Mishra, B. (2016) Intelligent Transport System (ITS), presentation at workshop on Smart 
Mobility for Bengaluru , Bengaluru, 10 Jun 
https://www.slideshare.net/EMBARQNetwork/bmtc -intelligent -transport -system  
 
NITI (2015) Good Practices Resource Book , Natio nal Institution for Transforming India , New 
Delhi http://niti.gov.in/human -development/best -practices  
 
Philip, C.M. (2017a) BMTC plans to trim manpower with conductor -less buses , Indian 
Express , 13 Feb http://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/bengaluru/2017/feb/13/bmtc -
plans -to-trim -manpower -with -cond uctor -less-buses -1570054.html  
 
Philip, C.M. (2017b) Info system: only apathy on display, Indian Express , 13 Mar 
http://www.newindi anexpress.com/cities/bengaluru/2017/mar/13/info -system -only --
apathy -on-display -1580820.html  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 72  
21 
  
Prakash, R. (2008) BMTC`s satellite tracking system goes off -track , Business Standard , 18 
Aug http://www.business -standard.com/article/economy -policy/bmtc -s-satellite -tracking -
system -goes -off-track -108081801070_1.html  
 
Prasad, N.M. (2012) Intelligent Transport System KSRTC, Mysore , Karnataka State Road 
Transport Corporation, Bengaluru http://www.sutpindia.com/skin/pdf/event_22.pdf  
 
Ramakrishnan, S. (2015) Electronic ticketing systems: Who got it right and how , BESTpedia , 
21 Jul http://bestpedia.in/2015/07/electronic -ticketing -systems -1/ 
 
Ramakrishnan, S. (2016a) [Unsung h eroes] A candid chat with a BMTC conductor , 
BESTpedia , 16 Jun http://bestpedia.in/2016/06/unsung -heroes -a-candid -chat -with -a-bmtc -
conductor/  
 
Ramakrishnan, S. (2016b) A sneak peak at BMTC’s and MCTD’s ITS , BESTpedia , 18 Jun 
http://bestpedia.in/2016/06/sneak -peak -bmtc -mctd -its/ 
 
Reddy, R. (2017) Snap stir by BMTC women staffers disrupts services , Times of India , 2 Jun 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/snap -stir-by-bmtc -women -staffers -
disrupts -services/articleshow/58955135.cms  
 
Sengupta, R., Heeks, R., Chattapadhyay , S. & Foster, C. (2017) Exploring Big Data for 
Development: An Electricity Sector Case Study from India , GDI Development Informatics 
Working Paper no.66, University of Manchester, UK 
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/other -working -papers/di/  
 
Taylor, L.  & Broeders, D. (2015) In the name of development: power, profit and the 
datafication of the global South, Geoforum , 64, 229 -237 
 
The Hindu (2016) BMTC smart card launch delayed, The Hindu , 19 Dec 
http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/BMTC -smart -card -launch -
delayed /article16906384.ece  
 
The Hindu (2017) Flash strike by BMTC workers leaves commuters in the lurch , The Hindu , 4 
Jul http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/flash -strike -by-bmtc -workers -leaves -
commuters -in-the-lurch/article19205917.ece  
 
Urs, A. (2010) KSRTC to roll out intelligent transport system in Mysore , The Hindu , 14 Sep 
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays -paper/tp -logistics/ksrtc -to-roll-out-
intelligent -transport -system -in-mysore/article1003874.ece  
 
Vanajakshi, L., Subramanian, S.C. et al. (2016) Development of a Real Time Bus Arrival Time 
Prediction System under Indian Traffic Conditions , IIT Madras, Chennai 
https://coeut.iitm.ac.in/AP TS_Finalreport_2016.pdf  
 