© 2022 World BankAUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
FINAL PUBLICATION INFORMATION
"Blockchain and Land Administration"
The definitive version of the text was subsequently published in
The Legal Aspects of Blockchain, , 2018
Published by UNOPS and found at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/31419
THE FINAL PUBLISHED VERSION OF THIS MANUSCRIPT
IS AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHER’S PLATFORM
This Author Accepted Manuscript is copyrighted by World Bank and published by UNOPS. It is posted here by
agreement between them. Changes resulting from the publishing process—such as editing, corrections, structural
formatting, and other quality control mechanisms—may not be reflected in this version of the text.
You may download, copy, and distribute this Author Accepted Manuscript for noncommercial purposes. Your license
is limited by the following restrictions:
(1)You may use this Author Accepted Manuscript for noncommercial purposes only under a CC BY 3.0 IGO
license  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo .
(2)The integrity of the work and identification of the author, copyright owner, and publisher must be preserved
in any copy.
(3)You must attribute this Author Accepted Manuscript in the following format: This is an Author Accepted
Manuscript by Makala, Baloko; Anand, Aanchal "Blockchain and Land Administration"  © World Bank,
published in the The Legal Aspects of Blockchain 2018 CC BY 3.0 IGO http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/3.0/igo  http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/31419130 131
9.1 BACKGROUND ON BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
Blockchain is the technology that powers the much-talked 
about cryptocurrency, Bitcoin. However, Bitcoin is just one 
application of the blockchain. Blockchain is essentially 
a “chain of blocks, ” where each block represents a set 
of records. Each such record could, in turn, represent a 
cryptocurrency, a land plot, a diamond, or even an identity. 
In this sense, if the traditional Internet is an Internet of 
information, blockchain is considered the “Internet of 
value. ” Therefore, the technology has the potential to 
revolutionize the way value is stored and exchanged.
The technology has been evolving for the most part 
unregulated as lawmakers and regulators are yet to 
fully understand the cryptocurrency phenomenon on 
the one hand and on the other hand, they are being 
called upon to review current regulations to integrate 
blockchain technology and protect consumers against 
fraud. Even though there are doubts about the viability 
of cryptocurrencies, the unanimous opinion is that the 
underlying technology Blockchain will revolutionize the 
way value is stored and transferred. Therefore, this chapter 
does not focus on cryptocurrencies and looks instead 
at the wider usability and applicability of blockchain in 
international development.
Notable papers and articles have been published by 
academics and legal practitioners to explain blockchain 
technology in terms that can be understood by  
non-technology experts. International Development 
Organizations such as The World Bank Group through its 
Technology and Innovation Lab and other UN organizations 
are also working on unpacking and analyzing the various 
concepts behind the blockchain ecosystem to derive Although they do so coarsely, the four fields themselves 
already delineate intended purposes of data. Information 
can be reused ritually, rationally (for an assessment), 
functionally (for interests), and intentionally (for a 
purpose).
Finally, it is not relevant for this description whether it 
involves personal information or otherwise. All information 
is given meaning from its context. The fact that purpose 
limitation is for now mostly associated with privacy is 
more due to the special rights people enjoy than it is due 
to information technology considerations.09
Blockchain and 
Land Admin-
istration  90, 91
Baloko Makala and 
Aanchal Anand  92
90  This Chapter is published 
under Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 IGO (CC BY 3.0 
IGO)
91  The findings, 
interpretations, and 
conclusions expressed in 
this work do not necessarily 
reflect the views of The World 
Bank, its Board of Executive 
Directors, or the governments 
they represent. The World 
Bank does not guarantee the 
accuracy of the data included 
in this work. The boundaries, 
colors, denominations, and 
other information shown on 
any map in this work   ▷ 132 133
to be particularly energy intensive, to the extent that is 
becoming an issue of concern on a global level. This is not 
only due to the substantial amount of energy consumed 
by the process of mining and climate change implications 
when it is powered by dirty energy, but also because only 
nations with access to large and relatively cheap energy 
sources will be able to enjoy the economic incentive of 
mining.
A proof of stake model, on the other hand, uses the amount 
of stake a user has as a determining factor for new blocks 
creation. The methods the blockchain system usage of 
stakes can vary – from random selection of staked users, to 
multi-round voting, to a coin aging system. Regardless of 
the exact approach, users with more stake are more likely 
to produce new blocks. 94
Virtually anything can be recorded on a blockchain. One of 
the key strengths of distributed ledger technology is that 
the technology guarantees the validity of the information 
once stored provided that the information encoded is 
correct. If any data is tempered in one of the nodes, the 
error will be recognized by the remaining nodes.
In a blockchain environment, two parties can transact 
without knowing each other and without the need of a 
trusted intermediary. The privacy of users is a particularly 
challenging to regulators in operations involving financial 
transactions. The principle of “know-your-customer” (KYC) 
goes against “privacy, ” one of the key founding principles 
of blockchain technology.
9.2.1 Smart Contracts
The Technology and Innovation Lab at the World Bank 
developed several proofs of concept (POCs) using smart relevant questions as blockchain is being considered for 
solving development challenges. New terminologies such 
as “consensus mechanisms” or “smart contracts” are 
making their way into to our everyday vocabulary. Such 
novel concepts need a legal interpretation and assessment 
of their potential impact in a real-world situation. The 
following is an attempt to explain how blockchain 
technology works and the key components relevant to the 
field of international development with specific focus on 
land administration. 
9.2 HOW DOES BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY WORK
Blockchain technology is an instance of a Distributed 
Ledger Technology (DL T). DL Ts fall into two broad 
categories: permissionless (open DL Ts) such as Ethereum 
or the Bitcoin blockchain, or permissioned (closed DL Ts) 
that tend to exist between entities that know each other 
such as commercial banks. Hybrids of both categories 
have also been developed. 93
In a blockchain environment, the information is stored 
in a distributed fashion on computers called “nodes” by 
way of consensus between participating nodes. Given 
that blockchain is a decentralized peer to peer system 
with no central decision-making mechanism, a dynamic 
mechanism of reaching agreement known as consensus 
stands in lieu of a central entity of authority. Multiple types 
of consensus mechanisms are found, the most notable 
ones are proof of work  and proof of stake . In proof of work, 
the consensus mechanism consists of solving a complex 
computational challenge to add a block to the blockchain 
and a reward is given to the first computer or “miner” 
capable of solving the challenge. This process is known ◁   do not imply any judgment 
on the part of The World 
Bank concerning the legal 
status of any territory or the 
endorsement or acceptance of 
such boundaries.)
92  Baloko Makala is the 
Policy and Legal stream Lead  
at the World Bank Group 
Technology and Innovation 
lab. Aanchal Anand is a Land 
Administration Specialist 
in the Global Land and 
Geospatial Unit of the World 
Bank.)
93  Global Benchmarking 
Study https://www.jbs.cam.
ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/
research/centres/alternative-
finance/downloads/2017-
09-27-ccaf-globalbchain.pdf  
page 2294  Blockchain Technology 
Overview https://csrc.nist.gov/
CSRC/media/Publications/
nistir/8202/draft/documents/
nistir8202-draft.pdf134 135
Smart contracts are not fool-proof and the code itself is 
subject to human error that can lead to dire consequences 
and loss of substantial financial value. Nevertheless, when 
properly designed, smart contracts have the potential to 
remove the inefficiencies and weaknesses found in real 
world systems    
9.3 BLOCKCHAIN AND LAND ADMINISTRATION
The following sections are devoted to blockchain and land 
administration, 99 an area that has attracted attention from 
blockchain developers and international development 
experts  alike. Therefore, these sections aim to demon-
strate the opportunities and challenges associated with 
blockchain technology in a field that has a significant 
impact on governance.
In order to better understand the blockchain’s applicability 
to land, the following features should be kept in mind. 
What makes blockchain unique is that it is a decentralized, 
distributed, and immutable ledger. 100 Its decentralized 
processing on several “nodes” or computers connected to 
the blockchain network ensures that there is no one single 
deciding authority validating transactions. This, in turn, 
means that transactions are peer-validated (on public 
blockchains) or validated by multiple authorized users (on 
private blockchains 101), thereby reducing the opportunity 
for corruption or rent-seeking behavior by a single actor or 
entity. In some cases, the decentralized nature could also 
decrease transaction cost and possibly transaction time 
on public blockchains where peer-validation takes over 
functions of third-party intermediaries. 
The distributed aspect has significant implications for contracts for land administration. These were developed 
using the Ethereum blockchain and solidity as the coding 
language. 95 The following are some of the preliminary 
observations:
Smart contracts are auto-executing programs encoded on 
a blockchain that are triggered once predefined require-
ments or conditions are met. They are comparatively 
low on memory as they are replicable over multiple 
nodes. Security is a key consideration when developing 
smart contracts. Furthermore, the signing mechanism is 
guaranteed by a combination of public keys and private 
keys. Should a user lose the private key or make it public, 
she/he may not be able to recover the key or render his 
assets on the blockchain vulnerable to theft or permanent 
loss. 96
Smart contracts are deterministic in the sense that when 
provided with specific input and specific start value, the 
outcome remains predictable. 97 Therefore, smart contracts 
are not “smart” and cannot perform any intelligent action 
such as the performance of any contract or legal act. It is 
important to mention that the blockchain cannot access 
information beyond the confines of its own environment. 
If the data source is corrupt, the blockchain does not have 
any mechanism to correct it or ascertain the reliability of 
the data source. Once the code has been deployed on a 
blockchain, it can no longer be changed unless the code 
contains functions allowing it to be changed or by way 
of a correcting transaction or by encouraging the other 
participants in a blockchain network to initiate a “hard-
fork” or a split into two blockchains. 
Smart contracts can also be used a source of storage of value 
while waiting for the terms of a contract to be fulfilled. 98 95  Mahesh Chandrahas Karajgi 
(Smart Contract Developer) 
interviewed Baloko Makala on 
03/19/2018
96  ‘I forgot My Pin: An epic tale 
of losing $30,000 in bitcoin’ 
https://www.wired.com/
story/i-forgot-my-pin-an-epic-
tale-of-losing-dollar30000-in-
bitcoin/  
97  Smart Contract as specific 
Application of Blockchain 
Technology https://www.
pelsrijcken.nl/media/591947/
smart-contracts-eng-report.
pdf
98  Blockchain Demystified 
https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=309121899  Land administration is 
a broad concept that was 
first coined in 1993 by the 
United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe 
(UNECE) and is broadly 
defined as the “process of 
determining, recording and 
disseminating information 
about ownership, value 
and use of land and its 
associated resources. These 
processes include the 
determination (sometimes 
called ´adjudication´) 
of land rights and other 
attributes, surveying and 
describing these, their 
detailed documentation, 
and the provision of relevant 
information for supporting 
land markets. ” http://
www.fao.org/in-action/
herramienta-administracion-
tierras/introduction/concept-
land-administration/en/  
100  The Internet of Value-
Exchange, Deloitte Report: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/
content/dam/Deloitte/uk/
Documents/Innovation/
deloitte-uk-internet-of-value-
exchange.pdf
101  It is important to note that 
“blockchain” is not a monolith 
and there are different types 
of blockchains with different 
levels of access.     ▷ 136 137
106 which register land titles and transactions respectively 
on the blockchain. While the public blockchain is more 
transparent and tamper-resistant, the private blockchain 
comes with the stamp of approval of piloting Governments 
that would uphold the legality of transactions on the 
blockchain platform. Without Government recognition, 
transactions are unlikely to be considered valid. 
A description of how blockchain may help resolve some 
of the land administration challenges is presented in 
greater detail in the next two sections. The first one 
provides theoretical foundations of blockchain’s uses and 
the second describes the land administration use cases 
conducted at the World Bank Group’s Technology and 
Innovation Lab. It is important to note that these proofs 
of concepts were developed under laboratory conditions 
and they have not been tested in any jurisdiction. 
Proofs of concept customized to fit certain jurisdictions 
requirements may be developed in the future.
9.3.1 Can Blockchain Improve Land Administration?
Being a relatively new technology, blockchain’s uses, 
advantages and challenges across different sectors, 
including land administration, are still being discovered 
and debated. This section looks at some of the biggest land 
administration challenges and how blockchain technology 
may make a difference.
9.3.1.1 Corruption in the Land Sector
Corruption in the land sector can be considered 
“pervasive and without effective means of control. ” 107 
Lack of transparency and asymmetric information allow  
elite capture and create opportunities for corruption. 
While digital systems have already improved access to 
information and increased transparency, blockchain disaster recovery as the data can be spread across different 
nodes. If one node is destroyed (say, in an earthquake or a 
flood), the data can be recovered from other nodes on the 
blockchain. 
Perhaps, the most attractive feature of the blockchain is 
its immutability. Each block is connected to the previous 
block through an algorithm that is cryptographically 
secure and contains information on the previous block. 102 
Therefore, unlike an ordinary ledger, which is organized 
by page numbers that are unrelated to the contents of 
the page, the blockchain’s “blocks” contain a hash that 
represents the contents of the previous block. This means 
that it is mathematically nearly impossible to change a 
record in the past without disrupting the entire chain. Even 
if such a thing were to happen, it would not escape the 
notice of other nodes. At the same time, it is important to 
note that blockchain immutability is a relative concept, 103 
and that collusion and “51% attacks, ” while prohibitively 
expensive and time-consuming, are possible. 104
In the context of land administration, virtual authentication 
is the simplest application on a public blockchain. Instead 
of requiring a notary to certify previous ownership 
while transferring an asset, the public blockchain could 
theoretically process the virtual authentication at a lower 
cost due to disintermediation. 
However, it appears that most land registry applications 
are likely to be on private blockchains, where only 
authorized institutions or individuals have access to the 
system and have pre-defined roles to clear transactions per 
their legally-defined function. This can be seen in the cases 
of the second phase of the Chromaway pilot in Sweden 105 
and the Consensys pilot with the Dubai Land Department ◁    Public blockchains are 
the most secure but may not 
allow land registries to have 
full control of the blockchain 
whereas private or hybrid 
blockchains are tailored to 
specific functions but are not 
as secure. This trade-off would 
need to be further explored 
through discussions with 
interested governments and 
other stakeholders.
102  A gentle introduction to 
immutability of blockchains, 
Bits on Blocks,  https://
bitsonblocks.net/2016/02/29/a-
gentle-introduction-to-
immutability-of-blockchains/  
103  Ibid.
104  The Blockchain 
Immutability Myth, Mutltichain, 
https://www.multichain.com/
blog/2017/05/blockchain-
immutability-myth/  
105  Swedish Mapping Authority 
Pioneering Blockchain-Based 
Real Estate Sales:  https://www.
nasdaq.com/article/swedish-
mapping-authority-pioneering-
blockchain-based-real-estate-
sales-cm935347  
106  Blockchain Virtual GovHack 
video: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=-y0WGwzKaxI  107  Corruption in the Land 
Sector, Transparency 
International and FAO, 2011, 
http://files.transparency.org/
content/download/70/279/
file/2011_4_TI_FAO_
LandAndCorruption_EN.pdf  138 139
9.3.1.2 Cybersecurity
It is estimated that in most countries, between 50% to 
75% of a country’s wealth exists in the form of land or real 
estate. 109  Land is also an important factor of production 
that contributes to different sectors of the economy. In 
addition, land can often be the only asset of the poor. 
Therefore, as land administration ICT systems and records 
are being digitized, cybersecurity becomes more and more 
important with respect to safeguarding people’s ownership 
of their single most important asset. When digital systems 
come under attack, there is a threat that land and property 
records could be hacked and manipulated. Blockchain 
technology offers an added layer of security through 
its immutable nature and the advantage that records 
generally cannot be tampered with. 110 This feature of the 
blockchain is expected to become more prominent in land 
administration. 
9.3.1.3 Disaster Recovery
Blockchain’s distributed nature enables a very important 
application for land administration: disaster recovery of 
land records and information. 111 As of now, in the case of 
natural disasters and wars, servers containing land rights 
information need to be physically guarded to protect 
valuable information. While disaster recovery centers are 
increasingly common, they too consist of servers that face 
similar threats as the original databases. Blockchain’s 
ability to distribute data across all participating nodes 
greatly reduces the threat of data loss. In the event of 
disasters, blockchain could enable data recovery and help 
the country and the market return to normal functionality 
more swiftly than with current available means. This 
would be critical for smooth post-disaster recovery, which 
can often be slow and challenging. Pilots would need 
to be conducted to test the robustness and feasibility of may be able to offer further advantages over 
existing digital systems. Due to its immutable 
nature, once a transaction has been processed, 
it cannot be removed from the blockchain thus 
creating a tamper-proof record. Any alteration 
to an existing record or transaction would make 
the hash value or unique identification of the 
tampered block inconsistent with other blocks 
in the chain. As discussed earlier, tampering 
with a public blockchain will be both expensive and time-
consuming, thereby creating disincentives around altering 
records. 
Land registries, however, are expected to operate on 
private blockchains. These private blockchains provide 
more control to authorized users. More control also 
means that such blockchains could be more susceptible 
to tampering by colluding participating nodes, thereby 
nullifying the immutability aspect. However, a private 
blockchain could be designed in a way that citizens have 
view-access to anonymous parameters like transaction 
time and cost, creating an extra layer of accountability 
even on a public blockchain. This approach would not 
only afford a blockchain-based land registry the main 
benefits of a public blockchain—such as faster transaction 
verification, error correction, and greater security from 
external attacks 108—but also create room for greater 
transparency and accountability by adopting elements 
of peer-to-peer validation through citizen engagement. 
This is a clear advantage over existing systems where 
paper and digital records can be tampered without much 
consequence. Therefore, if harnessed properly, blockchain 
has the power to boost transparency and reduce corruption 
in the land sector. 
108  How Safe Are Blockchains: 
It Depends, Harvard Business 
Review, March 7, 2017, https://
hbr.org/2017/03/how-safe-
are-blockchains-it-depends  109  The Effects of Land 
Registration on Financial 
Development and Economic 
Growth, Frank Byamugisha, 
1999. 
110  See earlier discussion on 
circumstances when public 
and private blockchains may 
be tampered with.
111  Note: the reliance on 
physical in-country servers is 
also being reduced by cloud 
technology. One disaster 
recovery solution could 
involve marrying blockchain 
with cloud technologies. 140 141
It is still unclear if and how blockchain may be able to 
bring down transaction costs. On public blockchains, 
the hypothesis is derived from disintermediation. If the 
consensus mechanism can perform the function of a third-
party intermediary e.g. a notary, then the cost to the citizen 
is expected to decrease. It is more difficult to estimate the 
impact of transaction costs on private blockchains. Pilots 
would need to be conducted to look at the marginal cost 
of executing common land administration services on 
the blockchain. Furthermore, the fixed costs of setting up 
and maintaining a private blockchain-based land registry 
would also need to be considered.
9.4 LAND ADMINISTRATION USE CASES 
9.4.1 Proof of Concept: Design
The World Bank’s Global Land and Geospatial Unit 
(GSULN) 113 and the World Bank Group Technology and 
Innovation Lab (TI) are collaborating on exploring use 
cases for land administration. This work focuses not 
only on the technological solutions but also looks at “off  
chain” issues such as governance, legal and regulatory 
framework, enabling conditions (e.g. data accuracy, 
digitized records, digital signatures), and institutional and 
capacity questions. 
As part of this work, the GSULN and TI teams partnered 
to carry out a “proof of concept” 114 (PoC) or simulation 
under laboratory conditions for three use cases: (a) first 
registration of a parcel; (b) transfer of ownership; and 
(c) virtual authentication. All three cases were selected 
as they are some of the most common services in land 
administration.   
 blockchain-based disaster recovery.
9.3.1.4 Property Rights of Women and Vulnerable Groups
Blockchain can enable “multisignature” transactions 
wherein more than one user’s private key is needed 
to complete a certain transaction. This can create 
significant advantages for the property rights of women 
and vulnerable groups. For example, women’s property 
rights, while guaranteed by law in most countries, are not 
always exercised due to strong cultural norms that favor 
male property ownership. In the case of marital property, 
women often lose out if the husband wants to sell the 
property. However, requiring the wife to also 
sign off on a transaction through her private 
blockchain key would provide an added layer 
of security for her property rights. While “off  
chain” coercion is still possible, blockchain 
would make it nearly impossible for the 
transaction to progress without the wife’s 
knowledge. Similar applications can be 
thought of for the registration and protection 
of indigenous peoples’ lands rights wherein 
a multisignature transaction can safeguard 
community rights and ensure that fair 
payments are made during any sale to all members of the 
community. 
9.3.1.5 Access to Affordable Services
Another significant challenge in the field of land 
administration is that roughly 70% of the world’s population 
does not have access to affordable land administration 
services 112 e.g. land or property registration. While the 
fee structures vary across countries, notarization and 
registration fees can often amount to several months’ 
income. 
112  Enhancing Public Sector 
Performance: Malaysia’s 
Experience with Transforming 
Land Administration, World 
Bank Group, November 
2017, http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/
en/928151510547698367/
pdf/121243-REVISED-World-
Bank-Report-06-Land-
Administration-FA-FULL-
Web-V2.pdf  113  The GSULN team also 
received input from the Food 
and Agriculture Organization.
114  A proof of concept is 
Assessing or demonstrating 
the viability / feasibility of 
trending emerging/disruptive 
technologies in the context of 
our business environment.142 143
to reduce the time associated with the transaction while 
simultaneously improving transparency in the process and 
increasing trust between the interacting parties. The next 
round of POCs could include adding commercial banks (for 
linking mortgages) to this scenario to broaden its usability.
9.4.1.3 Virtual Authentication
As discussed in Section 3, blockchain can be used for virtual 
authentication.  In this use case, the use case explored the 
“notarization” of a transaction by a notary and the creation 
of a time-stamped record on a blockchain platform. As of 
now, this POC did not look at the cost of the service to the 
citizen though this could be studied in future POCs.
9.4.2 Proof of Concept: Outcomes
The POC exercise has enabled the GSULN and TI teams to 
better understand how blockchain technology works as 
well as the opportunities and challenges associated with 
blockchain solutions. As a result of the POC work, the 
teams are better equipped to ideate and create use cases 
beyond the three that have been developed. The teams 
are also investing time in understanding off-chain issues 
that affect the applicability, viability, and effectiveness 
of blockchain solutions in specific country contexts. This 
exercise has been helpful to better understand the enabling 
conditions and operational constraints. Overall, the teams 
have created, applied, and shared knowledge to have 
meaningful discussions with client countries interested in 
exploring blockchain technology. The teams plan to take 
this work forward by conducting POCs on additional use 
cases. Subject to the availability of funds, the next phase 
of POCs may also include interested client countries. Over 
time, the teams will start exploring the cost-benefit aspects 
of applying blockchain solutions.The teams implemented the PoC using Microsoft Azure 
Blockchain-as-a-Service. A private Ethereum blockchain 
was chosen, which provided the teams the ability to 
configure the blockchain, specifically the proof-of-work 
consensus and transaction costs. The PoC simulated 
transactions between owner/possessor, buyer, private 
surveyor, and the land registry office. Each transaction was 
submitted to the transaction node, which was broadcasted 
to the mining nodes in a peer-to-peer fashion. When a 
mining node validated and confirmed a transaction, it 
was added to the blockchain and broadcasted to the peer-
to-peer network for confirmation. Smart contracts were 
coded using Solidity language, which allowed the teams 
to implement the transactions securely. Each transaction 
captured the parameters of properties e.g. parcel details, 
status, documents on/off-chain storage and the signatures 
of the involved actors. 
9.4.1.1. First Registration of a Parcel
While parcel registration is a common service, the use case 
focused on the simpler first registration. This was done for 
simplicity as first registration (the first record of a parcel 
registration) does not require the existence of a parcel 
history on the blockchain. As the technology develops, 
more complex registration scenarios can 
be tested under the POC stage. 
9.4.1.2 Transfer of Ownership
Another important land administration 
service is the transfer of ownership where 
a buyer and seller come together and 
complete a transaction on the blockchain 
platform. This use case is being tested with 
a client country and initial results show 
the opportunity to use smart contracts 
“ The POC exercise 
has enabled the 
GSULN and TI teams 
to better understand 
how the blockchain 
technology works 
as well as the 
opportunities 
and challenges 
associated with 
blockchain 
solutions. ”144 145
environment where systems are expected to operate 
across borders, the design of such system could prove to 
be challenging. 
Given that Blockchain technology is distributed by 
nature and that participating nodes in the recording of a 
transaction may be located across multiple jurisdictions 
should a permission-less system be used, therefore, the 
major challenge is that several jurisdictions may need 
to be considered when addressing the legal questions 
surrounding the transactions being carried out over the 
blockchain. 116
Specifically, to land administration, challenges may arise 
in the appropriateness of a technology characterized by 
immutability in areas where customary law apply in the 
administration of land rights. In fact, in Africa, 90% of land 
is held under customary tenure. Customary laws have a 
great impact in matters regarding marriage, inheritance 
and traditional authority, usually in a context characterized 
by patriarchy. 117 Indigenous peoples and other minorities 
have been traditionally marginalized. Women in particular 
have often been excluded from inheriting land from 
their fathers or husbands. Often, the name of the wife 
or daughter would not appear on the land titles.  These 
women may find themselves further disenfranchised in 
a decentralized world characterized by immutability of 
records.
9.5.2 Principle of Digital Development and Ethical 
Design
The introduction of digital tools to solve development 
challenges is not novel. However, they have often 
been marked by failure. The digital principles for 
development are nine living guidelines that are designed 9.5 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS IN BLOCKCHAIN 
TECHNOLOGY AND LAND ADMINISTRATION
Land rights remain fundamental to poverty reduction. For 
example, in Africa, the productivity of the land is directly 
linked to poverty reduction. It leads to access to basic 
services such as health care and education. Land ownership 
implies access to shelter and basic infrastructure, 
employment and financial services. 115 While land rights are 
fundamental to the livelihood of people, land ownership 
remains nonetheless a complex process and subject to a 
wide range of legal agreements subject to laws at local and 
national levels including international treaties.
As the policy and lawmakers’ community is in the process 
of building its capacity in addressing the inner workings 
of blockchain technology, many questions have started 
to emerge, challenging previous assertions that have 
been made on the benefits or drawbacks attributed to 
blockchain technology. Given the various ongoing pilots, 
it appears that blockchain may well contribute towards 
resolving some of the challenges that have been plaguing 
land administration systems. However, if deployed in the 
absence of a satisfactory legal and governance framework, 
the technology may be used to exacerbate the existing 
challenges. This section attempts to unpack legal and 
governance considerations in Blockchain and Land 
administration.
9.5.1 Applicable Legal Systems
Legal systems vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Most 
nations follow one of the following two legal systems: 
Common Law or Civil Law. While legal systems in each 
category may share a common legal heritage, each 
jurisdiction has its own specificities. In blockchain-enabled 115  The Impact of 
International Treaties on Land 
and Resource Rights, http://
www.ielrc.org/content/a0407.
pdf116  Blockchain: background, 
challenges and legal issues 
https://www.dlapiper.
com/en/uk/insights/
publications/2017/06/
blockchain-background-
challenges-legal-issues/
117  A frican Customary Law, 
Customs and Women’s Rights 
https://www.repository.law.
indiana.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?referer=http://www.
google.com/
url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&
esrc=s&source=
web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjBz
5edmczZAhXipVkKHT8o
CmIQFggnMAA&url=
http%3A%2F%2Fwww.
repository.law.indiana.
edu%2Fcgi%2Fviewcontent.
cgi%3Farticle%3D1437%26
context%3Dijgls&usg=AOvVaw
2se8KksARyAJalf__
TB6Mv&httpsredir=1&article=
1437&context=ijgls
118  Principles for digital 
development  https://
digitalprinciples.org/  
119  Blockchain Ethical 
Framework for Social Impact 
– Executive Summary (Beeck 
Center for Social Impact/
Georgetown University)146 147
the key legal issues is data governance. 
From a process standpoint, recording a land title on a 
blockchain raises a number of questions. The system does 
not consider potential “off chain” issues that may arise 
prior to the recording of transactions on the blockchain. 
Land ownership is often contested and land titles do 
require often correction as a result of dispute resolution 
or any other outcome from a judicial process. Should the 
wrong transaction be recorded on the blockchain, it would 
potentially requite more resources to have it changed. 
This could further hurt the rights and interests of poor and 
marginalized communities. Therefore, countries interested 
in blockchain-based land registries must be mindful of 
addressing “off chain” aspects such as completion of 
records, data quality and accuracy, dispute resolution etc.
In the context of Blockchain technology and land 
administration, the process of recording land titles on 
the Blockchain may prove to be a source of exacerbation 
of the disenfranchised nature of minority groups because 
of the quasi- immutability of records on the Blockchain 
when compared to current recording systems, thus placing 
vulnerable groups at even greater risk of not being able to 
restore their right to land.
9.5.4 Pseudo anonymity vs. Identity
One of the principles of Blockchain technology is the 
preservation of the privacy of its actors. The data breach 
suffered by Equifax 123, a US based-credit reporting 
company is often cited when debating the need to 
decentralize identity information and that people should 
be in control of their identity data and how it is shared. 
In the context of land administration, privacy may be an 
impediment to the management of land rights and it may to help integrate best practice into technology-enabled 
programs. 118 Blockchain Technology could benefit from 
these guidelines to avert repeating the mistakes of the past 
technology solutions. 
Ethical design should be central to blockchain technology 
to ensure the best outcome for end user and particularly 
when these are the most vulnerable members of society 
such as refugees, children, the disabled and women. 
Important question should be asked in the process of 
designing a blockchain solution including the governance 
model, how identities are established, the authentication 
and verification method, data ownership and access, 
security. 119
9.5.3 Data Governance
Blockchain technology as an open, permission-less system 
was designed so as not to rely on a centralized governance 
system. Participants do not need to know or trust each 
other in order to transact. This system was built in such 
way that no intermediary institutions such as government, 
banks etc. would be needed to verify the transactions and 
records automated on the blockchain through consensus 
and cryptographic means. 120 
One of the roles of land administrators is to provide 
opportunities for all rights holders to be explicitly 
recognized and be included in all legal documents as 
appropriate within the existing legal framework 121  In 
most countries, cadastres and land registries contain 
geographic and legal information regarding land and 
property. Contrary to other information systems, data can 
be created and retrieved but virtually impossible to alter 
without significant resources and control of computing 
power. As in the case of most information systems, one of 119  Blockchain Ethical 
Framework for Social Impact 
– Executive Summary (Beeck 
Center for Social Impact/
Georgetown University)
120  Blockchain Technology 
and Decentralized 
Governance: Is State Still 
necessary? http://nzz-files-
prod.s3-website-eu-west-
1.amazonaws.com
/files/9/3/1/
blockchain+Is+the+
State+Still+Necessary_
1.18689931.pdf
121  The Role of Land 
Administrator Professionals 
http://www.fao.org/
docrep/005/Y4308E/y4308e08.
htm123  2017 Cybersecurity 
Incident & Important 
Consumer Information https://
www.equifaxsecurity2017.
com/148 149
9.5.7 Electronic Signatures
The legal recognition of digital signature or e-signature 
is an important aspect to be taken into account should 
a blockchain solution be envisaged. Many countries are 
yet to fully recognized digital signatures as valid form of 
signatures.
9.5.8 Security
The now infamous DAO breach is a perfect example 
that demonstrate that Blockchain systems may not be 
completely shielded from breaches. The DAO stands 
for Digital Decentralized Autonomous Organization and 
rested on the premises of organizing both commercial and 
for-profit enterprise with no conventional management 
system. A vulnerability in the DAO code exposed the 
organization and a third of its funds were stolen as result of 
a bug in its smart contract code. There has been a number 
of instance of “security breaches” affecting the blockchain 
ecosystem. 
9.6 THE WAY FORWARD ON BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY 
AND LAND ADMINISTRATION
Blockchain technology and its applications in the field of 
land administration remain new and relatively untested. 
As discussed in this chapter, there are several “on chain” 
and “off chain” considerations that still need to be 
explored, studied, and tested. Furthermore, for blockchain 
technology to be widely adopted, it would need to 
demonstrate clear and quantifiable advantages over 
existing digital systems. 
The World Bank continues to explore this technology to 
determine its fitness and applicability in ending extreme not be an option depending on the existing laws. In the 
case of a public blockchain, various options of identity 
management solutions are being explored but still in 
infancy stages. In the use cases explored in the Technology 
and Innovation lab, identity has been managed in a 
centralized fashion while others are experimenting with 
new solutions. 124
9.5.5 Data ownership and Data Access
Whilst a private blockchain is more likely to be used in the 
context of land administration, data ownership and data 
access remains nevertheless a relevant issue. The quality 
of record on the onset would need to be up to standard 
and error -free, which is hardly the case with land cadaster 
including legacy geographical data impact both the issue of 
ownership and access. There is a new form of privatization 
of the registration of land rights which will create a new 
challenge on who should own the data. 125 Furthermore, 
the multiplicity of copies of the ledger in several nodes 
begs the question on whether all nodes should have the 
same data and which data should be accessible e.g. private 
information on land owner would be shared across all 
nodes.
9.5.6 Standards
Blockchain technology and smart contract are relatively 
new artifacts. There is no prevalent standard at this 
point on blockchain technology although several 
institutions are looking at standards for blockchain 
including ITSO 126 where the ISO/TC 307 working 
group has been set up to explore the said standards. 
Recently, the Chinese government launched an 
initiative to develop standards. 127
124  Peter Zhou interviewed by 
Baloko Makala on 03/20/2018
125  Blockchain and Smart 
Contract by Josephus Van Erp 
(The Maastricht University), 
Land Conference 2018 
(03/1/2018)
126  ITSO/TC 307 Blockchain 
and Distributed ledger 
technologies https://www.iso.
org/committee/6266604.html
127  Press release, Ministry 
of Industry and Information 
Technology of the People’s 
Republic of China http://
www.miit.gov.cn/n1146290/
n1146402/n1146440/
c6081357/content.html “ Blockchain 
technology and 
its applications in 
the field of land 
administration 
remain new and 
relatively untested. ”150 151
THE TECHNO-LEGAL CONNECTION BETWEEN 
BLOCKCHAIN, THE FEDERAL RESERVE, AND THE GREAT 
DEPRESSION
BLOCKCHAIN IS FULL RESERVE BANKING: 
ARE WE PREPARED FOR THIS?
Cryptocurrency, on the surface, is a family of technologies 
and associated systems of dedicated hardware that 
appear to be ripe for proof of concepts at the government, 
monetary policy, and even macro-economic domains. We 
see this in current events with the turbulent launching of 
the Venezuelan El Petro asset backed currency, the ebb and 
flow of funding into geopolitical pilots, and the prospective 
defensive tactics taken by the Chinese government 
against cryptocurrency. Is a blockchain based currency or 
commodity an asset or a liability at the geopolitical level, 
and what core issues should policy makers have in mind 
when framing their countries’ exploration of blockchain 
and cryptocurrency pilots? Is blockchain a friend of 
government monetary policy makers that stands to lower 
costs, revolutionize local financial sectors, or is it a driver 
of decentralized threats and loss of control? Blockchain 
stands at the intersection of technology, economics, and 
monetary regulation and policy – too few understand all 
three sufficiently well enough to appreciate the issues that 
rest at the intersection of these disparate domains. What 
is needed is a better system of integrating and designing 
blockchain pilots with contract law, monetary policy, and 
blockchain’s technological limitations.
These issues, and others, stand at the forefront of many 
today, without appropriate framing – and perhaps 
more troublesome – without careful consideration of 
the long term implications of blockchain backed assets 
and currencies. While the superficial interpretation of poverty and boosting shared prosperity in many areas, 
including land administration. Some of the next steps on 
the land administration front include: (a) conducting more 
POCs e.g. mortgage registration, which is expected to have 
a positive impact on commercial banks and urban housing; 
(b) testing the POC with interested client countries to learn 
more about adapting the POC to specific jurisdictions; 
(c) exploring the possibility of marrying the blockchain 
technology with other technologies e.g. cloud, AI to 
develop innovative client solutions; and (d) continuing to 
study the legal and policy implications of blockchain-
based land administration services. Additionally, the World 
Bank Group continues to invest in knowledge and learning 
activities and studying the growing number of blockchain-
based land administration pilots across the world. The 
World Bank Group also seeks partners with whom these 
issues can be explored in greater depth and breadth.10
Blockchain 
Market 
Microstructure 
Implements the 
100% Reserve 
Chicago Plan – 
Now What?
Matt Stack  128
128  Matt Stack is a founder 
of XLP Capital, the founding 
manager of the Lambda Prime 
Venture Funds, and the Chief 
Investment Officer of XLP’s 
technology equity and credit 
investments at Devonshire 
Capital Funds. He serves 
as the lead cryptocurrency 
and blockchain advisor to 
the United Nations, where 
he advises governments 
on technology and central 
banking policies.