Original Paper
Deter minants of Scale-up From a Small Pilot to a National
Electronic Immunization Registr y in Vietnam: Qualitativ e
Evaluation
Huyen Dang1, MD, PhD; Sang Dao2, MPH; Emily Carnahan3, MPH; Nami Kawakyu3,4, RN, MPH; Hong Duong1,
MD, PhD; Trung Nguyen1, MPH; Doan Nguyen1, MD; Linh Nguyen2, MPH; Maya Rivera2, MPH; Tuan Ngo2, MScIT ;
Laurie Werner3, MPA; Nga Nguyen2, MD, PhD
1National Expanded Program on Immunization, National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology , Hanoi, Vietnam
2PATH, Hanoi, Vietnam
3PATH, Seattle, WA, United States
4Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
Corr esponding Author:
Nga Nguyen, MD, PhD
PATH
#1101, 11th Floor , Hanoi Towers, 49 Hai Bai Trung Street
Hoan Kiem District
Hanoi,
Vietnam
Phone: 84 24 3936 2216 ext 105
Email: ntnguyen@path.or g
Abstr act
Backgr ound: Digital health innovations can impro ve health system performance, yet previous experience has shown that many
innovations do not advance beyond the pilot stage to achie ve scale. Vietnam’ s National Immunization Information System (NIIS)
began as a series of digital health pilots, first initiated in 2010, and was officially launched nationwide in 2017. The NIIS is one
of the few examples of an electronic immunization registry (EIR) at national scale in low- and middle-income countries.
Objecti ve: The aim of this study was to understand the determinants of scale-up of the national EIR in Vietnam.
Methods: This qualitati ve study explored the facilitators and barriers to national scale-up of the EIR in Vietnam. Qualitati ve
data were collected from October to December 2019 through in-depth key informant intervie ws and desk review. The mHealth
Assessment and Planning for Scale (MAPS) Toolkit guided the development of the study design, intervie w guides, and analytic
frame work. MAPS defines the key determinants of success, or the “axes of scale, ” to be groundw ork, partnerships, financial
health, technology and architecture, operations, and monitoring and evaluation.
Results: The partnership and operations axes were critical to the successful scale-up of the EIR in Vietnam, while the groundw ork
and monitoring and the evaluation axes were considered to be strong contrib utors in the success of all the other axes. The partnership
model leveraged complementary strengths of the technical working group partners: the Ministry of Health General Department
of Preventive Medicine, the National Expanded Program on Immunization, Viettel (the mobile netw ork operator), and PATH.
The operational approach to introducing the NIIS with lean, iterati ve, and integrated training and supervision was also a key
facilitator to successful scale-up. The financial health, technology and architecture, and operations axes were identif ied as barriers
to successful deplo yment and scale-up. Key barriers to scale-up included insuf ficient estimates of operational costs, unanticipated
volume of data storage and transmission, lack of a national ID to support interoperability , and operational challenges among end
users. Overall, the multiple phases of EIR deplo yment and scale-up from 2010 to 2017 allowed for continuous learning and
impro vement that strengthened all the axes and contrib uted to successful scale-up.
Conclusions: The results highlight the importance of the measured, iterati ve approach that was taken to gradually expand a
series of small pilots to nationwide scale. The findings from this study can be used to inform other countries considering,
introducing, or in the process of scaling an EIR or other digital health innovations.
(J Med Internet Res 2020;22(9):e19923) doi: 10.2196/19923
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 1 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXKEYW ORDS
immunization; immunization information system; electronic immunization registry; scale-up; digital health interv ention; mHealth;
eHealth
Introduction
Digital health innovations are changing the way health is
delivered worldwide. The World Health Organization (WHO)
defines digital health as “the field of knowledge and practice
associated with the development and use of digital technologies
to impro ve health” [1]. Digital health innovations can play an
important role in impro ving health system performance and can
advance progress toward achie ving universal health coverage
and sustainable development goals [2,3]. However, previous
experience has shown that many digital health innovations do
not advance beyond the pilot stage to become institutionalized
within health systems [4-6].
Vietnam’ s National Immunization Information System (NIIS)
began as a series of digital health pilots, first initiated in 2010
[7], and was officially launched nationwide in 2017. By 2020,
the NIIS included 20 million client records. The NIIS is an
example of an electronic immunization registry (EIR), a
confidential, computerized, population-based routine system to
capture, store, access, and share individual-le vel, longitudinal
health information on vaccine doses administered [8,9].
Immunization is among the most cost-ef fective child health
interv entions and saves 2 to 3 million lives per year; however,
1 in 5 infants do not recei ve all their required vaccine doses
[10]. EIRs aim to impro ve the immunization delivery system
to reach every child by supporting the delivery of more effective,
efficient, data-dri ven care. EIRs can capture other
individual-le vel demographic or health data and can link to
other systems that manage vaccine stock and logistics, human
resources, or other individual or population health data [11]. In
Vietnam, the EIR, which includes SMS text message reminders,
has been shown to impro ve immunization coverage and
timeliness of vaccination [12] and is one of the few examples
of an EIR at national scale in low- and middle-income countries.
Scale-up refers to “deliberate efforts to increase the impact of
innovations successfully tested in pilot or experimental projects
so as to benef it more people and to foster polic y and program
development on a lasting basis” [13]. Scaling goes beyond
expanding an innovation to more users or geographies and in
fact often results in new organizational or technological
comple xities [14]. Others have defined scale more expansi vely,
including integration with the health system, sustainable funding
and government support, and the ability to replicate, refine, and
impro ve over time [4,15].
The digital health community has increasingly recognized the
importance of scale and has initiated efforts to support scaling
digital health interv entions [15]. The Principles for Digital
Development, collaborati vely developed by 500+ implementersto capture best practices for integrating technology in
development projects, highlight “design for scale” as one of 9
guiding principles [16]. Initiati ves like the Health Data
Collaborati ve [17], Digital Impact Alliance [18], and Digital
Square [19] have been launched to support scale-up through
alignment and coordination, strate gic resourcing, operational
guidance, and development of “global goods” that can be
adapted and scaled in new conte xts [15].
The evidence base to understand factors that influence scaling
digital health interv entions is limited [20,21]. The WHO and
others have identif ied the need for implementation research to
understand the comple xities of implementing and scaling digital
interv entions [2,6]. National EIRs are far from being universal,
even in high-income countries [22,23], and to our knowledge,
there are limited studies of the facilitators and barriers
influencing their scale-up, particularly in low-resource settings.
The aim of this study was to understand the determinants of
scale-up of the national EIR in Vietnam, thereby contrib uting
to the evidence on how and why digital interv entions can
successfully achie ve scale.
Methods
Study Design
This study explored the facilitators and barriers to national
scale-up of the EIR in Vietnam through qualitati ve methods,
using the mHealth Assessment and Planning for Scale (MAPS)
Toolkit as a conceptual frame work [13]. The MAPS Toolkit,
codeveloped in 2015 by the WHO, the United Nations
Foundation, and Johns Hopkins University , outlines 6 axes to
measure digital health project maturity . Qualitati ve data were
collected through in-depth key informant intervie ws and
document review and were analyzed according to the MAPS
Toolkit axes.
Conceptual Framew ork
The MAPS Toolkit served as the conceptual frame work for this
study to ground Vietnam’ s experience in scaling up an EIR
within known factors that influence successful scale-up and
sustainability of digital health products. Although the toolkit
was designed to prospecti vely guide iterati ve program
implementation, it has also been used for retrospecti ve program
evaluation [24]. MAPS defines the key determinants of success,
also known as the “axes of scale, ” to be groundw ork,
partnerships, financial health, technology and architecture,
operations, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (Figure 1),
each of which are divided into more specif ic drivers of success
(Figure 2) [13].
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 2 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 1. The mHealth Assessment and Planning for Scale Toolkit axes of scale [13]. mHealth: mobile health.
Figur e 2. The mHealth Assessment and Planning for Scale Toolkit drivers of success within each axis of scale [13].
Setting
Vietnam has a 5-level health system, with administrati ve levels
at the national, regional, provincial, district, and commune levels
[25]. At the national level, the Ministry of Health (MOH) sets
national policies and programs and manages the national and
regional-le vel hospitals and institutes [26]. The provincial level
oversees provincial health departments and provincial health
centers and hospitals that follow national MOH policies [26].
The Vietnam National Expanded Program on Immunization
(NEPI) was first introduced in Vietnam in 1981 with the primary
goal of protecting children from the most common infectiousdiseases by providing free immunization services to children
[27]. At the national level, the MOH’ s General Department of
Preventive Medicine (GDPM) oversees NEPI activities in 4
regions, 63 provinces and cities, 696 districts, and 11,138
communes (Figure 3) [25]. Public immunization services are
mainly delivered at the commune level, the hepatitis B vaccine
is provided at hospitals, and vaccines that are not supported by
NEPI are administered at fee-based immunization facilities [25].
Until 2009, Vietnam’ s immunization records and vaccine supply
tracking were paper based. Health centers began to be equipped
with computers in 2005; internet connection at the commune
level became available in 2012.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 3 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 3. Structure of the health system in Vietnam. EPI: Expanded Program on Immunization; IHE: Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology .
Inter vention
The evolution of the current national EIR in Vietnam began
with a small pilot (Figure 4). From 2010 to 2012, NEPI and
PATH, an international nongo vernmental organization serving
as a technical partner , collaborated with the WHO to develop
and pilot an electronic vaccine stock management system
(VaxTrak) in 3 provinces and an immunization registry softw are(ImmRe g) in one district of Ben Tre province. The goal of the
softw are was to impro ve the ability to track babies who were
due for vaccination and reduce the time for immunization
recording and reporting compared with a paper -based system.
Both systems were successful in reducing the time burden of
reporting among health workers and most users found the
systems to be acceptable and feasible for scale-up [7].
Figur e 4. Timeline of the electronic immunization registry introduction and scale-up in Vietnam. MOH: Ministry of Health; NIIS: National Immunization
Information System.
These two systems were combined, upgraded, and then deplo yed
by NEPI with support from PATH in all districts of Ben Tre
province from 2014 to 2015. This resulted in increased full
immunization coverage and impro ved on-time vaccination rates
[12].In 2016, this combined system was integrated into the NIIS,
which was being developed by the MOH in partnership with
Viettel, the largest mobile netw ork operator (MNO) in Vietnam.
The NIIS was to be an EIR system in which health workers
could register and track the immunization records of pregnant
women and newborns, as well as inform vaccine stock
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 4 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXmanagement. The NIIS technical working group includes
GDPM, NEPI, Viettel, and PATH, who partnered to pilot the
NIIS in 5 provinces. The NIIS was further upgraded based on
learnings from this experience and in preparation for national
scale-up. In June 2017, the NIIS was officially deplo yed
nationally . Leading up to nationwide scale-up, the MOH
requested all communes to back enter the full vaccination history
for all children born from January 2015 through June 2017.
From 2018 to 2019, the NIIS technical working group focused
on increasing NIIS uptak e, impro ving data quality and data use,
and transitioning completely to paperless immunization records.
As of January 2020, over 20 million records have been registered
into the system (including back-entered data, immunization data
for pregnant women, and childhood immunizations delivered
among the annual birth cohort of approximately 1.7 million
[28]).
Participants
Project documents were selected for inclusion in the document
review based on project and study relevance. A total of 1 project
proposal and 8 project evaluation reports detailing the project
objecti ves, processes, successes, and challenges were included
in the document review. Documents included end users’
perspecti ves on the acceptability and feasibility of the system
through surveys of Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI)
staff at provincial, district, and commune health centers
conducted in 2012 and 2015.
Critical case purposi ve sampling [29] was used to select key
informants to intervie w. A case was identif ied as critical based
on their essential and extensi ve involvement with the project,
with consideration for diversity of perspecti ves based on each
participant’ s role on the project. A total of 6 key informants
were selected: 2 Ministry of Health staff (1 from GDPM and 1
from NEPI), 2 representati ves from Viettel, and 2 PATH staff
members. These key informants represented each of the
organizations in the national-le vel NIIS technical working group
(TWG), had been involved in every phase of the NIIS
implementation, and were selected for their ability to speak to
all the axes of scale in the MAPS frame work.Data Collection
PATH staff conducted 6 in-depth semistructured intervie ws in
person with key informants from October to December 2019.
The semistructured intervie w guide was developed based on
the evaluation questions and the MAPS frame work. Intervie ws
were audiorecorded with permission from the informant, and
the intervie wer documented summary notes during the intervie w.
Audiorecordings were transcribed into Microsoft Word and
translated into English.
Data Analysis
An a priori codebook was developed, guided by the MAPS axes.
The codebook was then refined by coding data from project
documents and in-depth intervie ws in Microsoft Excel and
Atlas.ti (version 8; ATLAS.ti Scientif ic Softw are Development
GmbH). Coding was completed independently and concurrently
by 2 PATH staff and an external evaluator . Codes were reviewed
by the evaluation team and any changes or disagreements were
discussed until resolv ed. Once coding was finalized, codes were
grouped into key themes guided by the evaluation questions
and MAPS axes. Exemplary quotations were identif ied to
present the themes and were validated with key stakeholders.
Ethics
The study procedures were reviewed and recei ved nonresearch
determination by PATH. Prior to the intervie ws, participants
were informed of the study’ s objecti ves, advantages and
disadv antages of participating, and rights of participants.
Importance of maintaining confidentiality was emphasized
during training of data collectors and the start of intervie ws.
Written consent was obtained from all participants. Study data
were stored in an access-restricted server, only available to study
staff for the purpose of data analysis.
Results
Overview
Table 1summarizes the key facilitators and barriers experienced
during scale-up of the NIIS, organized by the MAPS axes of
scale.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 5 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 1. Key facilitators and barriers to scale-up.
Barriers Facilitators Axes of scale
N/Aa - Learnings from multiple pilots and phases con-
tributed to optimization of all other axes
- Learnings established scientif ic basis for scale-
upGroundw ork and monitoring and evaluation
N/A - Each member of the partnership plays a critical
role
- MOHbis owner and leader
- MOH contracts MNOcto provide a service
- Expansi ve technological, netw ork, human, and
financial resource capacity of MNO
- MNO well established and trusted by govern-
ment and publicPartnerships
- Unanticipated operational costs, particularly
for refresher trainings, supporti ve supervision,
and regular system upgrades- Estimated time and cost of system
- MNO provides services free of charge
- Government commitment to allocate budgetFinancial health
- Enormity of data affects system capacity and
netw ork connecti vity
- Lack of national ID- User-friendly system
- System adaptability
- Strong data security and privacy
- Existing infrastructureTechnology and architecture
- Dual reporting systems (paper and digital)
- Low computer literac y of end users
- High turno ver of health care workers- Availability of pretested and enhanced training
materials and standard operating procedures
- Cascading training-of-trainer training for nation-
wide training and technical support netw ork
- Integration of supervision within existing struc-
turesOperations
aN/A: not applicable.
bMOH: Ministry of Health.
cMNO: mobile netw ork operator .
Key Facilitators to Scale-up
The partnership and operations axes were most commonly
percei ved to be critical to the successful deplo yment and
scale-up of the EIR in Vietnam. Though key informants
identif ied elements in the financial health axis and technology
and architecture axis that were facilitators to successful scale-up,
these axes were not as commonly or strongly mentioned in
comparison to the partnership and operations axes. The
groundw ork and monitoring and evaluation axes were
considered to be strong contrib utors in the success of all the
other axes.
Partnership
The NIIS is a product of a hybrid model, with the public, private,
and civil society sectors contrib uting to the successful scale-up
and sustainability of the NIIS. The NIIS partnership has enabled
the government to own and run the system alongside supporti ve
partners working together as a team.
The NIIS TWG was formed in 2016 with the aim to contrib ute
to the technical implementation and sustainability of the NIIS.
Membership comprises MOH’ s GDPM as the management
authority , NEPI as the immunization expert, Viettel as the
technology expert, and PATH as the liaison, serving as the
connection across stakeholders. Initially the TWG met weekly ,then over time it shifted to once or twice per month, depending
on whether NIIS operationalization challenges emer ged that
required a timely response.
The most commonly expressed theme among key informants
was the importance of the partnership in the success of the EIR
implementation and scale-up. Key informants repeatedly noted
the importance of the role that each member held in the TWG.
One informant commented:
Each member of the TWG plays an important role. It
could not be as it is without each member .[Key
Informant A]
Key informants described the importance of the MOH’ s role,
both to sustainably lead and to oversee the national system. As
key informants observ ed:
Political commitment is key. First you need to have
political commitment, to invest in resour ces and
provide guidance from the government for
implementation. [Key Informant B]
Only the MOH can mana ge such a large system that
includes so much of the population. [Key Informant
C]
NEPI provided immunization expertise and acted as the
technical lead to define and develop immunization workflo ws,
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 6 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXuser requirements, and reporting systems and mechanisms.
NEPI also oversaw and strengthened the implementation of the
NIIS.
Given the expansi ve technological requirements of a national
EIR, the MOH sought to partner with an MNO that already had
an extensi ve netw ork and was capable of high-capacity data
storage. In addition to these technical specif ications, key
informants noted the importance of selecting a well-established
MNO with a history of success:
If you want to implement a system at this scale , it is
imper ative to work with a big company like Viettel.
The MNO of choice must have large capacity and a
large presence in the country , be financially secur e,
and be able to provide necessary human resour ces
in both quality and quantity . Choosing an MNO, it
would be best to select the largest MNO with the
longest history of success in the country of
implementation. [Key Informant D]
Additionally , some informants observ ed that the nature of the
partnership between MOH and Viettel was a driver for
successful scale-up and sustainability . That is, Viettel provided
key development, storage, and maintenance services rather than
only providing softw are developer services that would
eventually be transitioned to the government to maintain and
upgrade. As one informant explained:
Viettel provides a service , not just the softwar e, so
there is always a partner ship and not just a hando ver.
So, whene ver the system needs to be updated, the
MOH and Viettel are working together . NIIS belongs
to the MOH and Viettel provides a service . This is a
good model for other countries: outsour ce the service
to a mobile network operator.[Key Informant E]
PATH has played a critical role throughout the pilot–to–national
scale-up process. Having both local and global experience in
piloting, scaling up, and evaluating digital health products,
PATH was able to transfer all technology , such as data flow
and database structure design, to Viettel and share lessons
learned with the TWG. PATH could also act as a liaison between
the MOH, a health system–focused entity , and Viettel, an
information technology entity , given its experience in global
health and digital technologies. One informant explained:
PATH complements and supplements the gaps in
MOH and Viettel. PATH’s experience in the field,
piloting and demonstr ating and disseminating that
information globally , has been critical. [Key
Informant B]
This partnership, in which each partner contrib uted a critical
role, was built on a foundation of trust, which key informants
identif ied as an important driver of successful scale-up and
sustainability:
Viettel is government owned, so they trust the
government, and the government trusts them. So when
MOH trusts PATH, then there is a big circle of trust…
An MNO that is trusted by the government is very
important. Because the health information is very
sensitive . So the partner ship can only be establishedwith an MNO that is an old and trusted one, not a
new or just established MNO. This helps with
scaling-up. [Key Informant B]
Operations
Another recurrent theme across the intervie ws was the strength
of the end user training and support approach that was developed
for successful scalability and sustainability .
For NIIS national deplo yment, training materials and standard
operating procedures, which had been developed, tested, and
enhanced based on learnings from a landscape assessment and
monitoring and evaluation of multiple phases of the EIR, were
readily available for use. Additionally , the cascade approach to
conduct training-of-trainer trainings had been developed to
quickly establish and expand a netw ork to train end users across
the country . As one informant explained:
You want to conduct a cascade training because you
don’t have the resour ces to go everywher e. Instead,
conduct the training-of-tr ainer training to provincial
and district health work ers, then they can provide
training and technical support to end-user s in
hospitals, fee-based facilities, and commune health
center s. This is the best method due to limited
resour ces and the trainer s will be the supervisor s, so
this informs them about who is the strongest and who
is weak so they can provide feedbac k to them to
improve.[Key Informant E]
Through these trainings, a multile vel technical support netw ork
was established across the country . The trained provincial and
district health staff acted as mentors who served as focal points
for technical support at each health level and provided direct
support to end users. Supporti ve supervision was integrated into
existing structures of immunization supervision. In addition,
Viettel trained district-le vel staff on the NIIS, who are now able
to provide technical support to end users. This approach is
working to sustain country ownership and sustainability of the
NIIS in Vietnam.
Financial Health
Estimating the cost of the system and its implementation to
appropriately allocate resources to scale up was critical to the
success of the NIIS. After the first pilot from 2010 to 2012, a
business model frame work was developed to provide an
overvie w of the proposed key partners, resources, and activities
for sustaining and scaling an EIR in Vietnam. A costing model
was also created to determine the financial resources needed to
implement the system across multiple provinces in Vietnam.
Identif ied costs included softw are development and
maintenance, training, supporti ve supervision and monitoring,
and the cost for technical meetings after the first months of
implementation. In the case of the NIIS, the MOH has not
incurred the cost of softw are development and maintenance, as
the MNO has been providing these services in kind, currently
with the expectation that the pricing model may shift in the
long-term.
In addition to estimating costs of the system, as a necessary
component to successful EIR scale-up, it was essential to have
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 7 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXthe government commitment to allocate a budget to this work.
As one informant explained:
The government needs to commit and support the
implementation and [provide] direction and
leader ship to the local government to allocate the
budget for implementation and maintenance .[Key
Informant E]
Technology and Architecture
Key informants noted 3 main technology and architecture
facilitators to successful scale-up of the EIR related to the
technology itself: its user-centered design, adaptability , and
strong data security and privacy. Initial development of the EIR
and subsequent upgrades prioritized end user needs. As such,
The system is designed with high-r ate of acceptability
and is user-friendly . It meets the basic requir ements
of end-user s and it operates smoothly . These are
factor s to excite provinces to implement and use the
system. [Key Informant F]
The NIIS supports facility health workers to document and track
immunization records and can easily print electronic records
for storage in compliance with current regulations. Individual
immunization records can be updated with vaccine doses
delivered in different facilities, which is particularly important
in large cities where many children recei ve vaccines from public
and private facilities and there is a large migrant population
moving between facilities.
To maintain system acceptability by ensuring smooth operation
of the system, the NIIS has a mechanism to monitor system
operations so that issues that appear can quickly be resolv ed.
The system is updated regularly , and adaptations can be made
to fit evolving needs. Relatedly , the system has strong data
security and privacy measures to maintain public trust of the
NIIS.
In addition to the NIIS design, the importance of an already
existing technology infrastructure at health facilities cannot be
overstated as a facilitator to the successful deplo yment and scale
of the EIR. That is, because almost all health facilities in
Vietnam already had computers and internet, and health care
workers had access to computer systems, the NIIS could be
developed with this starting point in mind. Had computers and
internet not already been available at health facilities, the NIIS
would likely have been designed differently or would have
required additional resources at the outset for equipment and
connecti vity.
Groundw ork and Monitoring and Evaluation
The steps taken in the early phases of the EIR and the M&E
learnings from multiple EIR implementation phases set the
groundw ork for successful national scale-up, especially
informing the planning, implementation, and optimization of
the other axes of scale. Given this interconnected relationship
between groundw ork and M&E throughout the many
implementation phases, we merged these two axes for our
analysis.
Key groundw ork activities included a landscape analysis and
the development of a business model frame work. The main aimof the landscape analysis was to evaluate how a digital registry
might impro ve the ability to track children due for vaccinations
and how it might shorten the time required for recording and
reporting immunizations compared to a paper -based registry .
This analysis provided a snapshot of the current policies,
technical capacities, and health information systems already in
place or under development in Vietnam. On the importance of
conducting a landscape analysis, one informant emphasized:
It is a necessary step to look at two sides: the policy
and technical sides. Befor e you scale-up, you must
look at the policy environment and see what are the
advanta ges, what is available , and what are the gaps.
To under stand what is financially necessary and what
are some foreseen challeng es.[Key Informant B]
The analysis was particularly critical in informing the
development of the pilot EIR system in 2010 but also continued
to guide decisions about the operations and the technology and
architecture of the EIR phases. One major takeaway from the
analysis was the importance of understanding user needs to
build a system that supports end users at all levels. The analysis
also informed the development of the end user training plan, as
it identif ied potential issues such as high turno ver and low
computer literac y of health care workers that could affect
successful implementation and scale-up of the EIR.
Learnings gathered from both groundw ork activities and M&E
facilitated effective and efficient national scale-up:
We only had 8 months to work on the NIIS together
[in 2016], but at that time we already had the business
model and under stood well about the business and
the technical, so we could just transfer the knowledg e
and the technolo gy to develop the NIIS. This
shortened the time for NIIS development. [Key
Informant E]
The multiple phases of the EIR that preceded NIIS national
scale-up created many opportunities for learning and
optimization. In total, the Vietnam EIR system phased through
4 pilots and deplo yments from 2010 to 2017, starting with a
pilot at the district level, then scaled and piloted at the provincial
level, scaled again and piloted in multiple provinces, and then
finally , scaled nationally . As one informant noted:
The piloting of the system is so important to get
feedbac k from the end-user s, befor e scale-up. And it
is important to collect lessons learned as you go, to
determine when you can and how you can scale-up.
[Key Informant E]
This continuous test-learn-optimize and scale-learn-optimize
impro vement cycle allowed for impro vements in the operations
and technology and architecture of the EIR, such that by the
time it was scaled nationally , many things had been pretested
and impro ved.
Furthermore, evaluation activities from these phases contrib uted
to the growing evidence of the benef its of an EIR, as well as
local validation that such a system was both feasible and
effective in the Vietnam conte xt. It was these quantif iable
successes that catalyzed the support for nationwide scale-up.
As one key informant recommended:
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 8 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXThe pilot should be conducted in two years, to get the
feedbac k and upgrade the system, and have enough
time to evaluate the system. Two years is enough to
evaluate the impact of the system rather than just
evaluate the acceptability and feasibility of the system.
In the short-term, end-user s just want to say the good
things. [Key Informant E]
Key Barriers to Scale-up
The financial health, technology and architecture, and operations
axes were most commonly percei ved to be barriers to the
successful deplo yment and scale-up of the EIR in Vietnam.
Financial Health
Although the cost of EIR deplo yment was estimated during
various EIR phases, there were some costs to national scale-up
that were underestimated or not estimated. The majority of the
initial financial model was based on costs associated with
softw are development and maintenance. Budgets for operational
costs of training, supporti ve supervision, and monitoring and
evaluation were sometimes insuf ficient. For example, there was
insuf ficient funding and human resources for EIR’ s supporti ve
supervision visits:
A low budget for supportive supervision visits made
it difficult for higher level supervisor s to conduct
timely supervision of end-user s.[Key Informant F]
Local governments do not allocate budget for
resear ch and some don’t have supervision budgets,
so they had to integrate [NIIS supervision] with
supervision of other health areas.[Key Informant E]
Another unanticipated cost to scale-up was that, because of the
enormity of the data, the server has needed to be frequently
updated and expanded. Through this experience, the TWG has
identif ied the importance of accurately estimating the operational
aspects of scaling up an EIR.
Technology and Architecture
Two key barriers to successful scale-up and sustainability were
identif ied within the technology and architecture axis, namely
issues with data transmission and storage and interoperability .
Although a sizing and infrastructure assessment was conducted
to inform the server capacity and connecti vity bandwidth, the
substantial increase in the demand for data storage and
transmission for national scale-up were not appropriately
anticipated. There are nearly 20 million clients in the NIIS, and
this number will continue to increase as the population grows.
Informants explained:
We did not foresee just how large the data would be,
how large of a number of people would be register ed
into the system, and how to store this data without
slowing down the system. The number of people
register ed is growing rapidly… During times of high
influx, the NIIS system is overloaded. The server needs
to be updated and expanded frequently to
accommodate the enormity of the data. [Key
Informant F]We did not estimate the increase of data, therefore
could not optimize the algorithm as well as the
database infrastructur e from the beginning .[Key
Informant A]
This, along with a large number of people using the system, has
meant that the system can sometimes run slowly. The TWG is
working to find a solution, which includes upgrading the server,
separating the data storage and data query servers, and
developing standard operating procedures in cases where the
system is down. The MNO has also been working to address
this issue by identifying and indexing frequently queried data
files to optimize the speed of queries.
Another barrier to successful scale-up has been the lack of a
national ID to develop an integrated, interoperable system.
Viettel is currently working to develop a health information
system that integrates all data from existing systems, including
immunization, infectious diseases, and noncommunicable
diseases, all of which have their own softw are without a
common unique identif ier for each client. This has been an issue
even within the NIIS, with duplication of individual records.
(Based on a January 2019 GDPM report, 1.2% of NIIS records
were duplicates [30].) Similarly , facilities that use their own
systems, such as hospitals and private facilities, are not
interoperable with the NIIS. The NIIS includes barcode
technology , and it has been suggested that each child’ s unique
barcode could serve as a national ID; however, with limited
resources, there are few public facilities equipped with barcode
readers and printers. Through this experience, the TWG has
identif ied that having a national unique ID would be a facilitator
to building an interoperable system.
Operations
There were 3 key barriers to successful scale-up and
sustainability identif ied within the operations axis: dual
reporting, low computer literac y of end users, and high turno ver
of health care workers.
From the beginning, there have been persistent concerns among
health sector staff about whether an EIR would increase the
workload of health care workers. Evaluations of the early phases
of the system found that it successfully reduced the time burden
of reporting among health workers; however, the current
dual-reporting scenario is burdening the health workforce
workload. Because a completely digital system is not mandated
by the government, end users are tasked with using both the
paper -based system and the NIIS to ensure data accurac y in
both systems. During planning for national scale-up, a clear
transition plan from paper to digital would reduce the workload
for end users.
During the landscape analysis conducted in 2010, low computer
literac y of end users was identif ied as a possible barrier to
effective implementation and scale-up of an EIR. Some health
care workers were not well versed in computer usage, including
basic computer functions, such as typing and Microsoft Excel.
Low computer literac y also meant that staff would not know
how to use the data to calculate indicators and interpret results
for decision making. As one key informant described:
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 9 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXOne of the difficulties in the pilot phase was the
computer skills of the health care work ers. Some
needed a lot of support, even in typing . We trained
on everything . This was a big challeng e for
implementing the system. [Key Informant E]
Given that the issue was identif ied during the landscape analysis,
the project team was able to use various strate gies in the
development of the EIR and training approach to increase the
usability of the EIR for end users:
Due to different levels of digital literacy of commune
health work ers, each commune must assign two
people to take part in the training sessions. After the
training , this peer support is very important to ensur e
success in implementation. [Key Informant E]
A lot has changed since these early years of EIR implementation,
with an increasingly computer -literate health workforce and
increased computer and internet infrastructure at the commune
level. This change has helped increase the accessibility and
usability of the NIIS.
Another barrier to scale-up and sustainability identif ied during
the landscape analysis was the frequent staff rotation and high
staff turno ver rate. Again, because this was identif ied during
the landscape analysis, it was possible to address this during
the development of the training approach. Multiple staff
members at every level of the health system, including the health
facility , district, provincial, and national levels, are trained. The
cascading training-of-trainers approach (described in
“Operations” under the “Key Facilitators to Scale-up” section)
also ensures a sustainable peer-training system is in place to
train new staff. Vietnam is also exploring e-learning options to
train new staff.
Discussion
Principal Findings
While there were facilitators across all axes within the MAPS
frame work, the partnership and operations axes were most
commonly percei ved to be critical to the successful scale-up of
the EIR in Vietnam. The EIR scale-up has been facilitated by
a partnership comprised of public, private, and civil society
actors working together toward shared goals and leveraging
each partner’ s expertise. It was operationalized through a
cascading training-of-trainer approach, which was integrated
within existing supervision structures and used training materials
that were iterati vely refined during each phase of
implementation.
The most commonly percei ved barriers to the scale-up of the
EIR in Vietnam were related to the financial health, technology
and architecture, and operations axes. Related to financial health,
there were challenges in sufficiently estimating operational
costs associated with training, supporti ve supervision, and
monitoring and evaluation. Technology and architecture barriers
included issues with the unanticipated volume of data storage
and transmission demands and the lack of a national ID to
support interoperability with other health information systems.
Key operational barriers were mainly among end users andincluded challenges of dual-reporting systems, low computer
literac y, and high staff turno ver.
Overall, the phased approach of multiple small pilots allowed
for iterati ve assessment and planning that strengthened all the
axes and contrib uted to the successful scale-up.
Implications for Scale-up and Futur e Resear ch
Though the MAPS Toolkit was not designed as an evaluation
frame work, overall, the axes of scale and their specif ied
definitions helped ground the analysis for this evaluation. The
MAPS conceptual model ackno wledges that scaling up is an
“iterati ve cyclical process of thorough assessment, careful
planning and targeted impro vements” [13]. However, there is
not an axis or a cross-cutting axis to represent the dynamic,
continuous learning-and-impro vement process that was so
critical to the success of the full national-scale deplo yment of
the NIIS. In Vietnam, each of the 4 phases of the EIR
deplo yment from 2010 to 2017 allowed for opportunities to
learn and make impro vements that strengthened multiple axes.
The technology itself impro ved with feedback from end users
to impro ve its acceptability and functionality , operations
benef itted by fine-tuning training materials and standard
operating procedures, costing models were refined at various
points, and with time and experience, trust between the partners
continued to grow. Furthermore, the evaluation activities from
each phase built the evidence base, which strengthened partners’
support to continue to scale the system. Thus, the MAPS
frame work was adapted during analysis by merging the M&E
and groundw ork axes as a way to ackno wledge this
interconnectedness of the two axes. When applying the MAPS
frame work, implementors and evaluators should strive to
understand the interconnectness between and dynamic influences
across axes.
Using the MAPS Toolkit allowed for comparison between the
experience in Vietnam with that of Tanzania and Zambia, where
a recent study explored the factors influencing the introduction
and adoption of EIRs in low-resource settings using the MAPS
Toolkit [24]. Tanzania and Zambia took a similar approach by
starting implementation in a single pilot district or province
before expanding the EIR further , which was also percei ved as
a facilitator of scale-up, as it allowed for opportunities to learn
and iterate [24]. The value of pilot testing an EIR has been
documented in the United States as well [9] and is consistent
with the scale-up literature for other nondigital interv entions
[31].
The central role of the partnership model in Vietnam cannot be
overstated. There were initial challenges as partners developed
shared language and understanding across their areas of
expertise, which included public health and immunization,
financial health, and information technology . It was important
to allow time for this learning curve and to formalize roles as
part of the NIIS TWG. Lessons learned from implementing
subnational EIRs in the United States also highlighted the
importance of a steering committee or coalition to guide EIR
development and garner support [9]. Similar to Vietnam, in
both Tanzania and Zambia, the MOH leadership’ s support of
the EIR was an important facilitator , and the MOH relied on
PATH as a technical partner . However, the partnership model
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 10 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXin these African countries differed from Vietnam’ s in that
nongo vernmental partners, including PATH, John Snow Inc,
and the Catholic Medical Mission Board were more directly
involved with implementing the EIR at subnational levels in
Tanzania and Zambia [24]. Other countries may also not be able
to replicate the MNO partnership that was a key facilitator to
scale-up in Vietnam, as Viettel is uniquely positioned as a
state-o wned MNO with large mark et share across the country .
In terms of operations, Tanzania initially used an on-the-job
training approach that relied on PATH staff to visit each health
facility , but later Tanzania and Zambia implemented a
training-of-trainers approach similar to Vietnam’ s model. As
mentioned, nongo vernmental partners were more heavily
involved in the initial subnational deplo yment and trainings in
Tanzania and Zambia, which was also a large cost driver in
these countries [32]. In all three countries, EIR supervision was
integrated within existing structures, which was a facilitator for
scale and sustainability , but also meant there was limited time
spent specif ically on EIR issues during supervision visits.
Similar to Vietnam, Tanzania and Zambia also faced barriers
due to dual-reporting systems, low computer literac y of end
users, and high health care worker turno ver. Other studies echo
that human resources are a challenge to the Vietnam EPI as a
result of limited resources for supervision in hard-to-reach areas,
underpaid and unmoti vated frontline workers, and low levels
of knowledge and computer literac y [33].
Whereas in Vietnam, the existing technology infrastructure was
in place at health facilities, this was not the case in Tanzania
and Zambia, where lack of hardw are and electricity was a barrier
to initial introduction of the EIR [24]. Other technology and
architecture barriers to scale of the EIRs in Tanzania and Zambia
included synchronization delays, discrepancies in data across
systems, and challenges due to separate immunization service
delivery and stock management systems [24]. In Vietnam, this
last challenge was avoided by integrating ImmRe g and VaxTrak
into a single system (NIIS) before scaling nationwide. The
iterati ve piloting of the technology in Vietnam may have avoided
the heavy costs that can be associated with EIR redesign or
reconf iguration [9,32]. Both Tanzania and Zambia had to modify
their EIR requirements and design a second system for scale
[34].
As more countries aim to introduce EIRs, these findings can
inform efforts to plan for scale-up. Seth Berkle y, CEO of Gavi,
the Vaccine Alliance, wrote about the importance of harnessing
digital innovations to support immunization, noting that “one
of the biggest needs is for affordable, secure digital identif ication
systems that can store a child’ s medical history , and that can
be accessed even in places without reliable electricity” [35].
Previous studies have recommended using digital health
innovations for immunization, based on systematic reviews
[36], but there is recognition that current research on the role
of digital health in immunization initiati ves is limited [22,36].
This is true for the field of digital health overall, with repeated
calls to continue to strengthen the evidence base [6]. Thefindings presented here touch on priority evidence gaps related
to evaluating economics, enabling ecosystems, financial and
programmatic sustainability , and data use pathw ays related to
digital health interv entions [6].
Limitations
This study was based on the experience scaling the EIR in
Vietnam, and care should be taken when generalizing these
findings beyond Vietnam. This limitation was in part addressed
by identifying determinants guided by the MAPS Toolkit, a
conceptual frame work that can be applied to digital health
implementations in varied conte xts.
This study purposi vely selected key informants to represent the
range of partners on the NIIS TWG; each was very involved in
the EIR scale-up and could speak to the details of the
implementation. The study focused on national-le vel
stakeholders and did not include key informants representing
subnational or community perspecti ves. Although end user
perspecti ves were represented in the documents reviewed, for
a more comprehensi ve understanding of the factors influencing
the EIR scale-up in Vietnam, future studies could also include
perceptions of the barriers and facilitators from EIR end users
at the district and health facility levels, as well as caregiver or
community perceptions of immunization service delivery.
Different determinants may emer ge at each level. For example,
a systemic literature review (with the majority of studies from
the United States) identif ied health care providers’ perceptions
of usefulness and ease of use of digital health innovations as
influential factors to their acceptance of the innovation [37].
Dolan et al [24] highlighted some of the barriers influencing
EIR scale-up at subnational levels in Tanzania and Zambia,
including inadequate data bundles, increased workload due to
dual systems, and lack of EIR integration with the health
management information system (Zambia only). In Vietnam,
subnational differences in urbanization, socioeconomic status,
behaviors, and other factors that may have affected EIR scale-up
were not the focus of this study .
Conclusion
This study described the key facilitators and barriers that
influenced the scale-up of the NIIS in Vietnam using a
comprehensi ve digital health frame work. The results highlight
the importance of the measured, iterati ve approach that was
taken to gradually expand a series of small pilots to nationwide
scale. Key facilitators included the partnership model, which
leveraged complementary strengths of the MOH and GDPM,
NEPI, Viettel, and PATH, and the operational approach to
introducing the NIIS with lean, iterati ve, and integrated training
and supervision. Key barriers to scale-up included insuf ficient
estimates of operational costs, unanticipated volume of data
storage and transmission, lack of a national ID to support
interoperability , and operational challenges among end users.
The findings from this study can be used to inform other
countries considering, introducing, or in the process of scaling
an EIR or other digital health innovations.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 11 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXAckno wledgments
The authors thank the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) for providing support for this study . The authors also thank
the technical working group team members involved in implementing the EIR scale-up in Vietnam, including representati ves
from GDPM, NEPI, Northern EPI, Hanoi Center for Disease Control, and PATH. Thank you to the PATH Vietnam team: Hung
Pham, Thi Hoang, and Hai Le. The authors thank Tove Ryman (BMGF) for her support and guidance. This study was funded by
BMGF (Investment ID OPP1198325).
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Refer ences
1. Draft global strate gy on digital health 2020-2024. Gene va, Switzerland: World Health Organization URL: https://www .
who.int/docs/def ault-source/documents/gs4dhdaa2a9f352b0445bafbc79ca799dce4d.pdf [accessed 2020-09-02]
2. WHO Guideline: recommendations on digital interv entions for health system strengthening. Gene va, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2019. URL: https://www .who.int/publications-detail/
who-guideline-recommendations-on-digital-interv entions-for -health-system-strengthening [accessed 2020-09-02]
3. Mehl G, Labrique A. Prioritizing integrated mHealth strate gies for universal health coverage. Science 2014 Sep
12;345(6202):1284-1287. [doi: 10.1126/science.1258926 ] [Medline: 25214614 ]
4. Wilson K, Gertz B, Arenth B, Salisb ury N. The Journe y to Scale: Moving Together Past Digital Health Pilots. Seattle, WA:
PATH; 2014. URL: https://www .path.or g/resources/the-journe y-to-scale-mo ving-together -past-digital-health-pilots/
[accessed 2020-09-04]
5. Lemaire J. Scaling up mobile health: Elements necessary for the successful scale up of mHealth in developing countries.
Gene va, Switzerland: Advanced Development for Africa; 2011 Dec. URL: http://www .adaor ganization.net/uploads/2/3/7/
1/23713723/
scaling_up_mobile_health_elements_necessary_for_the_successful_scale_up_of_mhealth_in_de veloping_countries.pdf
[accessed 2020-09-04]
6. Labrique A, Vasude van L, Weiss W, Wilson K. Establishing Standards to Evaluate the Impact of Integrating Digital Health
into Health Systems. Glob Health Sci Pract 2018 Dec 10;6(Suppl 1):S5-S17 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.9745/GHSP-D-18-00230 ] [Medline: 30305335 ]
7. PATH, National Expanded Programme on Immunization. Summary of Optimize Activities Conducted With Vietnam's
National Expanded Programme on Immunization. Hanoi, Vietnam: PATH; 2012. URL: https://www .path.or g/resources/
summary-of-optimize-acti vities-conducted-with-vietnams-national-e xpanded-programme-on-immunization/ [accessed
2020-09-04]
8. Classif ication of Digital Health Interv entions v1.0. Gene va, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2018. URL: http:/
/apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/260480/WHO-RHR-18.06-eng.pdf?sequence=1 [accessed 2020-09-04]
9. Freeman VA, DeFriese GH. The challenge and potential of childhood immunization registries. Annu Rev Public Health
2003;24:227-246. [doi: 10.1146/annure v.publhealth.24.100901.140831 ] [Medline: 12668757 ]
10. UNICEF . Vaccination and Immunization Statistics. UNICEF Data: Monitoring the situation of children and women. 2019.
URL: https://data.unicef.or g/topic/child-health/immunization/ [accessed 2020-03-20]
11. Hinman AR, Ross DA. Immunization registries can be building blocks for national health information systems. Health Aff
(Mill wood) 2010 Apr;29(4):676-682. [doi: 10.1377/hlthaf f.2007.0594 ] [Medline: 20368598 ]
12. Nguyen NT, Vu HM, Dao SD, Tran HT, Nguyen TXC. Digital immunization registry: evidence for the impact of mHealth
on enhancing the immunization system and impro ving immunization coverage for children under one year old in Vietnam.
Mhealth 2017;3:26 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2017.06.03 ] [Medline: 28828373 ]
13. World Health Organization. The MAPS toolkit: mHealth assessment and planning for scale. Gene va, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2015. URL: http://www .who.int/entity/reproducti vehealth/publications/mhealth/maps/en/inde x.html
[accessed 2020-09-04]
14. Sanner TA, Roland LK, Braa K. From pilot to scale: Towards an mHealth typology for low-resource conte xts. 2012 Sep
Presented at: ECIS 2012 Proceedings; May 15, 2012; Barcelona, Spain URL: https://aisel.aisnet.or g/ecis2012/112 [doi:
10.1016/j.hlpt.2012.07.009 ]
15. Labrique AB, Wadhw ani C, Williams KA, Lampte y P, Hesp C, Luk R, et al. Best practices in scaling digital health in low
and middle income countries. Global Health 2018 Nov 03;14(1):103 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12992-018-0424-z ]
[Medline: 30390686 ]
16. Principles for Digital Development. URL: https://digitalprinciples.or g/principles/ [accessed 2019-01-30]
17. Health Data Collaborati ve. URL: https://www .healthdatacollaborati ve.org/[accessed 2020-04-24]
18. Digital Impact Alliance. URL: https://digitalimpactalliance.or g/[accessed 2020-04-24]
19. Digital Square. URL: https://digitalsquare.or g[accessed 2020-04-24]
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 12 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX20. Tomlinson M, Rotheram-Borus MJ, Swartz L, Tsai AC. Scaling up mHealth: where is the evidence? PLoS Med
2013;10(2):e1001382 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001382 ] [Medline: 23424286 ]
21. Agarwal S, Lefevre AE, Labrique AB. A Call to Digital Health Practitioners: New Guidelines Can Help Impro ve the Quality
of Digital Health Evidence. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2017 Oct 06;5(10):e136 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.6640 ]
[Medline: 28986340 ]
22. Tozzi AE, Gesualdo F, D'Ambrosio A, Pandolf i E, Agricola E, Lopalco P. Can Digital Tools Be Used for Impro ving
Immunization Programs? Front Public Health 2016;4:36 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00036 ] [Medline:
27014673 ]
23. Derrough T, Olsson K, Gianfredi V, Simondon F, Heijbel H, Danielsson N, et al. Immunisation Information Systems –
useful tools for monitoring vaccination programmes in EU/EEA countries, 2016. Euro Surveill 2017 Apr 27;22(17):30519.
[doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.es.2017.22.17.30519 ]
24. Dolan SB, Alao ME, Mwansa FD, Lymo DC, Bulula N, Carnahan E, et al. Perceptions of factors influencing the introduction
and adoption of electronic immunization registries in Tanzania and Zambia: a mixed methods study . Implement Sci Commun
2020;1:38 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s43058-020-00022-8 ] [Medline: 32885195 ]
25. Organizational system.: Vietnam Expanded Program on Immunization URL: http://www .tiemchungmorong.vn/vi/content/
he-thong-chuc.html [accessed 2020-04-24]
26. Nguyen TD, Dang AD, Van Damme P, Nguyen CV, Duong HT, Goossens H, et al. Coverage of the expanded program on
immunization in Vietnam: Results from 2 cluster surveys and routine reports. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2015;11(6):1526-1533
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1080/21645515.2015.1032487 ] [Medline: 25970593 ]
27. TCMR History .: Vietnam Expanded Program on Immunization URL: http://www .tiemchungmorong.vn/vi/content/
lich-su-tcmr .html [accessed 2020-04-24]
28. National Expanded Program on Immunization. Vietnam Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) Report 2018. Hanoi,
Vietnam: Vietnam Ministry of Health; 2019.
29. Cohen D, Crabtree B. Qualitati ve Research Guidelines Project. 2006. URL: http://www .qualres.or g/[accessed 2020-04-24]
30. General Department of Preventive Medicine. Report on duplications in 9 provinces. Quang Ninh, Vietnam: Vietnam Ministry
of Health; 2019.
31. Bark er PM, Reid A, Schall MW. A frame work for scaling up health interv entions: lessons from large-scale impro vement
initiati ves in Africa. Implement Sci 2016 Jan 29;11:12 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s13012-016-0374-x ] [Medline:
26821910 ]
32. Mvundura M, Di Giorgio L, Lymo D, Mwansa FD, Ngwe gwe B, Werner L. The costs of developing, deplo ying and
maintaining electronic immunisation registries in Tanzania and Zambia. BMJ Glob Health 2019;4(6):e001904 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2019-001904 ] [Medline: 31803511 ]
33. Nguyen C, Grappasonni I, Scuri S, Nguyen B, Nguyen T, Petrelli F. Immunization in Vietnam. Ann Ig 2019;31(3):291-305
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.7416/ai.2019.2291 ] [Medline: 31069373 ]
34. Seymour D, Werner L, Mwansa F, Bulula N, Mwanyika H, Dube M, et al. Electronic Immunization Registries in Tanzania
and Zambia: Shaping a Minimum Viable Product for Scaled Solutions. Front Public Health 2019;7:218 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00218 ] [Medline: 31440494 ]
35. Berkle y S. Immunization needs a technology boost. Nature 2017 Nov 16;551(7680):273. [doi: 10.1038/d41586-017-05923-8 ]
[Medline: 29144479 ]
36. Dumit EM, Novillo-Ortiz D, Contreras M, Velandia M, Dano varo-Holliday MC. The use of eHealth with immunizations:
An overvie w of systematic reviews. Vaccine 2018 Dec 18;36(52):7923-7928 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.v accine.2018.06.076 ] [Medline: 29983255 ]
37. Li J, Talaei-Khoei A, Seale H, Ray P, Macintyre CR. Health Care Provider Adoption of eHealth: Systematic Literature
Review. Interact J Med Res 2013;2(1):e7 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/ijmr .2468 ] [Medline: 23608679 ]
Abbreviations
BMGF: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
EIR: electronic immunization registry
GDPM: General Department of Preventive Medicine
MAPS: mHealth Assessment and Planning for Scale
M&E: monitoring and evaluation
MNO: mobile netw ork operator
MOH: Ministry of Health
NEPI: The Vietnam National Expanded Program on Immunization
NIIS: Vietnam’ s National Immunization Information System
TWG: technical working group
WHO: World Health Organization
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 13 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXEdited by G Eysenbac h; submitted 07.05.20; peer-reviewed by T Collins, M Das, N Jarour; comments to author 12.06.20; revised
version received 07.08.20; accepted 10.08.20; published 22.09.20
Please cite as:
Dang H, Dao S, Carnahan E, Kawak yu N, Duong H, Nguyen T, Nguyen D, Nguyen L, River a M, Ngo T, Werner L, Nguyen N
Determinants of Scale-up From a Small Pilot to a National Electr onic Immunization Registry in Vietnam: Qualitative Evaluation
J Med Internet Res 2020;22(9):e19923
URL: http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
doi: 10.2196/19923
PMID: 32960184
©Huyen Dang, Sang Dao, Emily Carnahan, Nami Kawakyu, Hong Duong, Trung Nguyen, Doan Nguyen, Linh Nguyen, Maya
Rivera, Tuan Ngo, Laurie Werner , Nga Nguyen. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(http://www .jmir.org), 22.09.2020. This is an open-access article distrib uted under the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution
License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research, is properly cited. The complete
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://www .jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license information
must be included.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 9 | e19923 | p. 14 http://www .jmir.org/2020/9/e19923/
(page number not for citation purposes)Dang et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX