 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Determining PMI’s Optimal Investment in 
Health Management Information Systems 
(HMIS) Strengthening in Uganda: A 
Landscape Analysis
 
December 12, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was authored by Beth Anne Pratt, Augustine Wandera and Nadia Shadravan. It was 
prepared for review by the QED Group, LLC on behalf of the USAID/Uganda Learning Activity 
Contract No. 72061719C00003. 
Determining PMI’s Optimal Investment in 
Health Management Information Systems 
(HMIS) Strengthening in Uganda: A 
Landscape Analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 12, 2019 
 
Contract: AID-72061719C00003 
COR Name: Martin Muwaga 
 
Submitted by:  
The QED Group LLC  
1820 N. Fort Myer Drive, Suite 700  
Arlington, VA 22209, USA  
Tel.: +1. 703.678.4700  
www.qedgroupllc.com  
 
 
Uganda Office:  
The QED Group LLC  
Embassy Plaza 1st Floor  
Plot 1188-1190, Ggaba Road,  
Kampala, Uganda  
 
 
 
  
2 
 Table of Contents 
List of Acronyms 3  
Executive Summary 5  
Background 12  
Purpose of the Analysis 19  
Methodology 20  
Findings 23  
Analysis Question 1:  Mapping Existing Donor Support 23  
Program Silos 23  
Chains of Referral 25  
Sustainability 26  
District Over-Representation 29  
Inputs and Processes 30  
Level of Support 31  
Analysis Question 2:  Key Inputs and Processes 32  
Redirecting Support to HC IIs 32  
Improving Regional Targeting 35  
Private Sector 37  
Defining Utilization 38  
Changing the Culture of Data Use 40  
Analysis Question 3:  Gaps in Systems Strengthening 43  
Conclusion 48  
Annex A:  Bibliography 50  
Annex B.  Scope of the Landscape Analysis 55  
Annex C:  Getting to Answers Matrix 57  
Annex D:  Methodology 60  
Annex E:  Interview Guides 64  
Annex F: Analysis of Variance with Respect to HC II Findings 69  
 
 
   
3 
 List of Acronyms 
 
AMFm Affordable Medicines Facility Malaria  
AHSPR Annual Health Sector Performance Report  
BMGF Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation  
CAO Chief Administrative Officer  
CDC Centers for Disease Control  
CDCS Country Development Cooperation Strategy  
CHAI Clinton Health Access Initiative  
CHEW Community Health Extension Worker  
CQI Collaborative Quality Improvement  
CSO Civil Society Organization  
DfID Department for International Development (UK)  
DHIS2 District Health Information System 2  
DHMT District Health Management Team  
DHO District Health Officer  
DLT District League Table  
DoD Department of Defense  
DQA Data Quality Assurance  
FETP Field Epidemiology Training Program  
FGD Focus Group Discussions  
GAVI Global Alliance for Vaccines Initiative  
GF Global Fund  
GFF Global Financing Facility  
GoU Government of Uganda  
HC Health Center  
HMIS Health Management Information Systems  
HRHIS Human Resources for Health Information System  
IDRC Infectious Disease Research Collaboration  
IICS Integrated Intelligent Computer Systems   
4 
 IP Implementing Partners  
IPD In-Patient Department  
IPTp Intermittant Preventative Treatment in Pregnancy  
KII Key Informant Interviews  
LMIS Logistics Management Information System  
MAPD Malaria Action Plan for Districts  
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation  
MIS Malaria Indicator Survey  
MoH Ministry of Health  
mRDT Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Test  
NMCD National Malaria Control Division  
NGO Non-Government Organization  
OPD Out-Patient Department  
PMI President’s Malaria Initiative  
RHITES Regional Health Integration to Enhance Services  
SMEOR TWG Surveillance, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Operational Research Technical 
Working Group  
TWG Technical Working Group  
UMRSP Uganda’s Malaria Reduction Strategic Plan  
UNICEF UN Children’s Fund  
USG United States Government  
VHT Village Health Team  
WB World Bank  
WHO World Health Organization  
WMS Warehouse Management System  
 
  
   
5 
 Executive Summary 
Background 
Since 2005, PMI has focused on reducing malaria-related mortality by 50% across 15 high-burden 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa through the rapid scale-up of proven and highly effective malaria 
prevention and treatment measures. Uganda, currently ranked 8th in number of malaria cases in sub-
Saharan Africa, has been a PMI focus country since 2006.  
 
The country has been making significant progress on malaria, with estimated incidence of malaria 
dropping from 272 cases per 1000 population in 2017 to 191 cases per 1000 population in 2018, and the 
most recent Malaria Indicator Survey (MIS) suggesting a sharp drop in malaria among children under 5, 
from 42% in 2009, to 19% in 2014, to 9% in 2018. At the same time, nearly all of Uganda’s population 
continues to live in districts classified as having ‘high endemicity’ and, thus, continues to be at risk of 
infection. Additionally, great variation in performance exists across regions, with northern districts 
having disproportionately adverse outcomes across almost all malaria indicators. Additionally, in 2019 
many parts of the country have seen large increases in cases and mortality compared to 2018.  
 
The goals of Uganda’s Malaria Reduction Strategic Plan 2014 – 2020 (UMRSP) are, by 2020, to reduce 
annual malaria deaths to near zero, malaria morbidity to 30 cases per 1000 population, and malaria 
parasite prevalence to less than 7%. The UMRSP serves as the primary framework for PMI support to 
Uganda. Critical to the achievement of these goals is the collection, analysis, and use of timely, complete, 
accurate, and high-quality malaria data generated through Uganda’s Health Management Information 
System (HMIS).  
 
*** 
Purpose 
The U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI) in Uganda has commissioned a mixed-methods landscape 
analysis to determine gaps in HMIS strengthening support to Uganda in order to help guide PMI’s 
investment in surveillance, monitoring and evaluation. PMI wishes to optimize its contribution to HMIS 
strengthening in Uganda by investing available resources in interventions not currently supported by 
other donors, especially those with the highest impact on routine health data timeliness, quality and use. 
In particular, PMI wishes to address challenges surrounding data collection and use at the data entry 
level in both health facilities and the community. This analysis looks at the following key questions: 
 Which key inputs and processes are already supported by donors? In which geographical areas? 
Since HMIS strengthening is not a disease-specific intervention, this mapping should include 
investments from a broad list of donors (e.g. PEPFAR, other USAID and CDC programs, 
Department of Defense, DFID, Global Fund, GAVI, etc.). 
 Which key inputs and processes, if strengthened, would lead to more timely reporting of malaria 
data, as well as optimal completeness, quality, and use at the health facility and community 
levels? 
 What are the gaps in supporting HMIS strengthening in Uganda and which of these gaps would 
make most sense for PMI to fill through existing mechanisms? 
 
Uganda’s National HMIS 
Uganda’s national HMIS can be characterized as an electronic-paper hybrid system, the primary platform 
for which is the District Health Information System (DHIS2). The DHIS2 was rolled out at scale in 2012, 
and since then there has been a notable increase in data completeness (94.3%), and timeliness (95.4%) of  
6 
 monthly and quarterly out-patient department (OPD) reports. Problems remain, however, with 
accuracy and quality, as well as timely data analysis and optimal utilization of data for decision making. 
Additionally, quarterly community case reporting is persistently low with wide variation between 
districts.  Moreover, weekly data are less complete, with rates varying in 2017/18 from a low of around 
50% in some districts to close to 100% in others and reporting rates varying greatly from month to 
month. 
 
A number of the barriers to the collection, reporting, and use of high-quality data is the massive burden 
of reporting engendered by the hybrid system. Dozens of paper forms and registers – including forms 
033b, 095, 097 and 031 which are most relevant to malaria - feed information into the DHIS2. Following 
the collection of this information, the weekly and monthly counts with respect to the indicators tracked 
by the paper forms are tallied by hand via other paper forms, and only then entered into the digitalized 
system by facility-based health workers and aggregated, validated, and analyzed by district biostatisticians 
often working from other paper forms. This burden becomes more sustained as one travels lower down 
the health system where facilities are more likely to be understaffed. Attempts have been made to 
overcome some of these hurdles through the introduction of electronic medical records (EMRs) but 
EMRs at health center level do not currently feed into the DHIS2 beyond HIV program silos and do not 
yet capture other health issues such as malaria.  Also, up to 60% of malaria patients seek their care in the 
private sector, but only a small proportion of private-for-profit (PFP) drug stores and are tracked, and 
only a fraction of these report into the DHIS2.  
 
Uganda’s new e-Health strategy mandates a shift toward total digitalization and universal EMR for all 
patients and, although it will take a number of years before this vision is achieved, digitalization – one 
way or another - will eventually go to scale.  Moreover, the UMRSP focuses several of its key objectives 
on capacity building to improve the district-level malaria response, including ensuring that at least 90% of 
all districts report routinely on malaria program performance for decision making and all malaria 
epidemic prone districts will have the capacity for epidemic preparedness and response. At the heart of 
these objectives is improved district capacity to manage the DHIS2. 
 
PMI Uganda is aligned to the UMRSP and PMI’s Global Strategy (2015-2020) has made improving 
countries’ capacity to collect and use information as one of its five core areas of strategic focus, above 
and apart from simply siloed investing in data for malaria control and elimination alone. PMI Uganda, 
therefore, has a strategic interest in maximizing its investments in both the national HMIS and the sub-
national information platforms that feed into it.  
 
*** 
   
7 
 Findings 
The landscape analysis found that there is already significant investment in HMIS strengthening by 
partners, particularly USG partners, but support is often siloed, specific to the programmatic objectives 
of the funder and implementer, and not systems-wide. Most of the significant implementing partners – 
both for malaria and outside of malaria - are already supporting all key HMIS inputs and processes (in 
particular, PEPFAR-funded partners) at almost all levels of the health system (communities, HC IIIs and 
IVs, hospitals, districts, NMCD). The level of USG investment in HMIS strengthening alone (not specific 
to malaria) is estimated at around 40% of the total. This figure cannot be assumed to be completely 
accurate in the absence of full budget information from USG (as well as due to differences in how 
different development partners categorize budget lines), but it should still be assumed that USG 
investment is so important to the overall HMIS that, in its absence, it would be difficult for the MoH to 
cover costs. Thus, sustainability of efforts is questionable. 
 
DfID financing also supports a large proportion of national, district-level capacity building for the DHIS2 
and for community-level data capture, but there is the strong possibility that DfID financing will begin to 
dry up as UKAID increasingly shifts away from bilateral programs to multilateral, multi-country 
initiatives. If this happens there will be a significant gap in funding for subnational information systems 
strengthening in the medium-term future. Additionally, some districts may be receiving disproportionate 
HMIS strengthening activities and it is unclear whether such activities are universally needed or if better 
targeting can take place. 
 
The analysis also identified a massive gap in financing and partner support at HC II level because HC IIs 
do not easily fit into programmatic silos. Districts and regions with greater proportions of HC IIs have 
considerably more significant issues with data completeness and weekly data timeliness than those that 
do not. 
 
Other findings include: 
 Districts with high malaria burden are sometimes not the districts performing poorly as assessed 
by DLTs and measures such as data completeness and timeliness. 
 While everyone agrees that data utilization is weak, nobody is measuring utilization in a 
meaningful way and only then in the context of partners’ own MEL activities or by proxy. 
 There are numerous issues with data utilization that are primarily technical, not the least of 
which is that different regional partners do not necessarily carry out their HMIS strengthening 
activities (e.g. training curricula) in a uniform way. 
 PFP sector contribution to the HMIS is only minimal. Most recommended means by which to 
engage private sector in reporting have already been tried in Uganda with limited success. 
 At the heart of utilization bottlenecks is the lack of a culture of data use. This bottleneck is 
created long before health workers enter the health service and will not be solved by technical 
fixes. 
 All bottlenecks, from data quality to utilization, are fueled by the paper-based reporting burden. 
 
*** 
   
8 
 Gaps 
The analysis, therefore, identified the following gaps in the investment landscape: 
Gap 1: Focus of PMI sub-national HMIS investment may be targeted too high (at HC IIIs and 
above). 
Gap 2: Focus of PMI sub-national HMIS investment may be targeting too many districts, and not 
the ones that need it most. 
Gap 3:  iCCM is an important target for support, but many other partners are already investing 
in it, alongside data systems for VHTs; however linkages to a) lower level facilities and to b) sub-
district government systems remain undeveloped. 
Gap 4:  Problems with utilization are anecdotal, and utilization is not routinely measured within 
existing systems and largely assessed by proxy. 
Gap 5:  There is little ownership of data at facility or community level. 
Gap 6:  PMI-financed partner training activities are often only malaria surveillance-focused, not 
systems focused, and partners are largely free to decide how these should take place. 
Gap 7.  Up to 60% of malaria cases are being treated in the for-profit private sector (PFP) which 
does not participate in the DHIS2 or HMIS. 
Gap 8.  The overwhelming reporting burden drives both data access bottlenecks and data 
utilization bottlenecks. 
*** 
Recommendations 
1. Redirect HMIS investment lower down the health system, i.e. to HC IIs. 
 
Rationale: 
Weekly reporting is worse further down the health system both with respect to timeliness and 
completeness. Other implementing partners and financing initiatives (e.g. PEPFAR) already support HMIS 
at HC III, HC IV, general/district hospital and RRH-levels, as well as iCCM. HC IIs represent a massive 
proportion of public-sector facilities in many regions (up to 80% in some). HC IIs are the lowest level of 
PHC and sit at an interface between communities and facilities further up along the line of referral. HC II 
staff often oversee VHTs. In many instances, it is at HC II level where malaria is caught, i.e. HC IIs do 
not have labs attached to them but likely will have mRDTs. Little to no support flows to HC IIs unless – 
in very rare cases - their patient volume is high enough/catchment area large enough to have them serve 
as HIV hubs or have maternity wards. 
 
2. With respect to HMIS, ensure implementing partners prioritize not just high burden malaria districts 
or districts with a surge, but districts with simultaneously weak systems, esp. new districts. 
 
Rationale:  
Some of the districts with the highest malaria burden are also – if DLTs can be trusted -- performing 
reasonably well with respect to health service delivery more generally, and data collection and utilization 
specifically (i.e. the issue of malaria burden may – sometimes – have to do with contextual factors and 
not poor quality data and sub-optimal utilization). Regional implementing partners are often tasked with 
either implementing HMIS strengthening activities everywhere or responding to facilities with particular 
problems. There are other ways of planning investment, though, and investing in HMIS systems where 
districts already perform well with respect to data systems may not bring value for money. When it 
comes to PMI HMIS investment, better targeting may make it possible to direct financing toward a 
critical constellation of factors (e.g. high malaria incidence + poor performance with respect to data +  
9 
 poor overall performance). New districts have new DHMTs, and so an opportunity exists to start with a 
clean slate in those districts that have been carved off of poorly performing existing districts. 
 
3. Invest in developing two-way iCCM – facility information “bridge” mechanisms, especially with 
respect to the bridge between communities/VHTs and HC IIs. 
 
Rationale: 
PMI and other partners already support iCCM, with partners such as UNICEF,  DfID SURMa, and TASO 
focusing on iCCM and VHT data systems. UNICEF has received Rockefeller funding to fully digitalize 
VHTs, with information being sent directly from VHT to DHIS2 (even though this will only be in select 
districts at first). Facilities, however, will still need to review VHT data for planning and the danger of full 
digitalization is that information from communities will bypass facilities altogether. A precedent already 
exists in CDC support for VHT/facility information bridge in the context of HIV. 
 
4. Help support performance measures by working with government and other partners to create 
clear, actionable indicators for data utilization and performance ranking embedded in the health 
system, not simply partner MEL activities. 
 
Rationale:  
Utilization is only really measured within implementing partners’ own project MEL plans, and then only 
within districts within projects’ coverage area. In spite of their issues, DLTs are the only routine, 
standardized, fully institutiontalized way that exists right now to really infer data use at scale. Data 
review is one of the main “systems strengthening” activities that most partners engage in but is 
unsustainable without external financial support and routine review is not institutionalized via dedicated 
budgets at central or district level. Beginning to wean local government off donor funding for data 
review begins with empowering and incentivizing district and facility leaders who utilize data. This 
requires better indicators than performance rankings and league tables. It also requires performance to 
be more easily measured below district, hospital and HC IV level, and in a standardized way that has 
been fully adopted by government (i.e. as evidenced within the AHSPR, etc.). 
 
5. Work with partners to develop and implement pre-service training modules for medical training 
institutions that focus on the role that data play in clinical care and facility management to develop a 
culture of data use prior to newly accredited health workers assuming their posts. 
 
Rationale:  
Health workers are trained for clinical care, not “data care” and cannot see link or usefulness of data in 
their daily work. Data needs of government and partners represent an overwhelming paperwork burden 
on facility workers, and many facilities do not have data clerks to support facility in-charges in managing 
data. Even where data clerks exist, the information going into the system is dependent on paper-based 
recording by health workers for whom reporting will always be less of a priority than treating patients.  
Technical “fixes” such as DQA and data review might improve the process of compiling and reporting 
data, but do not address the overall perception of lack of usefulness. While data utilization has been part 
of health management training courses for senior health managers (funded by USAID/Intrahealth, 
UNITAID/CHAI, DfID and others) as well as supplementary public health courses for licensed medical 
professionals (CDC), it is not part of routine medical training for health workers.  
  
10 
 6. Invest in standardized curricula development for HMIS strengthening activities by all partners, with 
focus specifically on such curricula emerging directly from the central Department of Health 
Information (DHI), not programs. 
 
Rationale:  
Both PMI global strategy and the NMCD mandate that investment in HMIS is an investment in systems 
strengthening more broadly, not just “malaria surveillance systems.” PMI MOPs budget lines have 
repeatedly financed “training” for facilities and districts for the last five years across multiple 
implementing partners, however, this training is largely focused on malaria indicators, not remedying 
overall systemic bottlenecks. Training is often being done ad hoc by implementing partners, e.g. when 
DHIS2 adds indicators for which training is needed, different regional partners have had to carry out this 
training largely using self-developed modules. Different financing initiatives (PEFPAR, GAVI, Global Fund) 
meant that many other MoH health implementing partners carry out ”training” activities with respect to 
HMIS/DHIS2, but the effort is frequently siloed according to health issue and efforts could, potentially, 
be time- and cost-shared. While MoH has HMIS training manuals, they don’t necessarily have 
standardized packages related to strengthening. 
 
7. Cross-agency/-initiative advocacy mechanism to support upstream advocacy toward regulatory and 
policy change. 
 
Rationale: 
No amount of investment can hold PFP accountable. Incentive/disincentive structures have to be built 
and this is the role of Uganda national regulatory bodies. Compliance has to be built in at the level of 
licensing/accreditation 
 
8. Partner with DHI and existing MEL IPs for solutions towards an automatic reporting and report 
generation tool/apps. 
 
Rationale:  
With respect to data, the thinking at facility level goes primarily into the act of meeting reporting 
obligations, not into any sort of analysis of “what does this information do for us”? There are multiple 
points in the process of data moving from the health worker to the DHIS2 where quality, completeness, 
timeliness and utilization of data run into barriers. Two of the most notable are a) the process of filling 
tally sheets and b) the act of generating useful reports. MRCs already have a partial version of such tools 
– e.g. an Excel sheet to remove tallying – so learnings here can be leveraged for something better. 
Predetermined pivots, for example, can be built into a reporting tool to take the thinking out of report 
generation and allow every health worker the chance to analyze data. 
 
*** 
Conclusion  
This landscape analysis addressed PMI strategic financing in Uganda’s national HMIS from the perspective 
of: 
1. Existing investment by other partners 
2. Critical gaps in existing investment 
3. Areas of systems strengthening through which malaria programming would necessarily benefit 
  
11 
 The analysis sought to create a set of evidence- and logic-based recommendations for strategic 
investment in the national HMIS, taking into account PMI Uganda’s dual purpose of both supporting the 
NMCD in generating sound malaria surveillance data toward malaria control and eventual elimination, 
and engaging in HMIS systems strengthening more broadly as mandated by the PMI Global Strategy. 
 
Underlying these recommendations are a general set of cross cutting principles that emerged across 
almost all discussions with stakeholders and are foundational elements within the Uganda National e-
Health Policy – digitalization, integration, culture of data use. These principles address the main systems 
barriers standing in the way of a robust national HMIS:  
1. A paper-based system and its contribution to the reporting burden 
2. Segmentation and its contribution to a siloed and uncoordinated HMIS strengthening response 
3. Lack of ownership and its contribution to a sub-optimal environment for data utilization 
 
The medium- to long-term strategies to address these systems barriers must involve the commitment to 
digitalization, integration, and a culture of data.  Therefore, prior to any strategic investment in the 
national HMIS, the larger questions that should be asked are:  
1. Will this initiative facilitate or be adaptable to a fully electronic HMIS? 
2. Will this initiative support integration of systems? 
3. Will this initiative bring value to end users at all levels of the health system? 
The answer to all of these questions should, ideally, be “yes”.  
   
12 
 Background 
 
Since 2005, PMI has focused on reducing malaria-related mortality by 50% across 15 high-burden 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa through the rapid scale-up of proven and highly effective malaria 
prevention and treatment measures.1 Uganda, currently ranked 8th in number of malaria cases in sub-
Saharan Africa, has been a PMI focus country since 2006.2  
 
Over the last decade, Uganda has made remarkable progress on malaria. The Ministry of Health’s (MoH) 
Malaria Annual Report 2017/18 estimated incidence of malaria at 191 cases per 1000 population having 
dropped from 272 cases per 1000 population the previous year.3 Confirmed malaria cases as a 
proportion of all out-patient department (OPD) cases was estimated at 20%, with test positivity rates 
estimated at 39% and malaria deaths as a proportion of all deaths at 5%, compared to 23%, 49%, and 
11% respectively in 2016/17.4   Moreover, while the 2018-19 Malaria Indicator Survey (MIS) is still being 
analyzed, preliminary results suggest a sharp drop in malaria among children under 5, from 42% in 2009, 
to 19% in 2014, to 9% in 2018.5  
 
Nevertheless, the MoH has noted that nearly all of Uganda’s population lives in districts classified as 
having ‘high endemicity’ and, thus, continues to be at risk of infection.6 Moreover, great variation in 
incidence of malaria, its burden on local health systems, and morbidity and mortality rates exists 
between regions, with districts in the north of the country having disproportionately adverse outcomes 
across almost all malaria indicators.7 Additionally, Uganda experiences variation in malaria incidence 
from year to year, with 2019 seeing a large increase in cases and mortality compared to 2018 inspite of 
progress made over previous years, underling the fact that retaining malaria gains can be very tricky (for 
example, Table 1). 
 
Table 1: Weekly Malaria Cases, Weeks 31-41, 2018 and 2019 
Week 
Year 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
2018 99,342 101,839 100,728 92,077 89,175 91,568 99,353 101,158 104,724 79,877 86,235 
2019 228,528 215,978 207,358 131,0248 184,687 181,456 208,007 183,331 196,421 195,142 138,471 
Source: Ministry of Health Surveillance Data 
 
The goals of Uganda’s Malaria Reduction Strategic Plan 2014 – 2020 (UMRSP) are, by 2020, to reduce 
annual malaria deaths to near zero, malaria morbidity to 30 cases per 1000 population, and malaria 
parasite prevalence to less than 7%.9 The UMRSP serves as the primary framework for PMI support to 
Uganda. Critical to the achievement of these goals is the ability of Uganda’s National Malaria Control 
Division (NMCD) and its partners to efficiently collect, analyze, and use of timely, complete, accurate, 
and high-quality malaria data generated through Uganda’s Health Management Information System 
(HMIS). Uganda’s HMIS gathers, compiles, synthesizes, communicates and enables utilization of data 
 
1 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2018). 
2 Ibid. 
3 Ministry of Health (2018a).   
4 Ibid. 
5 UBOS & ICF Macro (2010); UBOS & ICF Macro (2015); UBOS & ICF Macro (2019). 
6 Ibid. 
7 UBOS & ICF Macro (2019). 
8 Weekly reporting rates for weeks in question all between 74-81%, except 2019, week 34, at 42% 
9 Ministry of Health (2014).  
13 
 from the country’s health sector for the purpose of evidence-based decision making on the part of the 
Government of Uganda (GoU) and its development partners. 
 
Uganda’s National HMIS 
Uganda’s national HMIS can be characterized as an electronic-paper hybrid system.10 Elements of it 
involve the digitalization of information and its storage within central databases. There are several of 
these – – including IICS for national and some regional referral hospitals (RRH), HRHIS for health human 
resources and LMIS and WMS for different components of health commodity supply chain logistics – but 
the primary platform, and the one most important to malaria programming, is the platform through 
which subnational data enters the national HMIS via health facilities and districts: the District Health 
Information System (DHIS2). 
 
The DHIS2 is an open source software platform that allows districts to report, aggregate, validate, 
analyze and disseminate district level data across a range of primary health indicators on a weekly, 
monthly, and quarterly basis. DHIS2 serves as the primary foundation for Uganda’s national HMIS, and is 
vital to decentralized governance, as the information collected within should ideally serve to improve 
districts’ ability to provide efficient, high quality, transparent, responsive public services, all key principles 
with respect to democratic accountability.11 
 
The GoU rolled out the DHIS2 at scale in 2012. Since roll out, there has been generally high rates of 
completeness (94.3%), and timeliness (95.4%) of monthly and quarterly OPD reports, including data 
related to malaria.12 PMI Malaria Operational Plans (MOPs) over the last several years, however, note 
problems with data accuracy and quality, and timely data analysis and use are often sub-optimal.13 These 
observations are backed up by a number of field studies and systematic literature reviews.14  
Additionally, quarterly community case reporting via the VHT/iCCM form 097 – which supervisory 
facilities use to transfer information from VHT paper forms to the DHIS2 - is persistently low with wide 
variation between districts.15  Moreover, while monthly data received from the HMIS/DHIS2 system 
have a high completeness rate, weekly data are less complete, with rates varying in 2017/18 from a low 
of around 50% in some districts to close to 100% in others, resulting in an average of 74.7%, down from 
almost 77% in 2016/17 (Figure 1).16 Additionally, weekly reporting rates vary greatly across time, with 
2019 rates rising and falling dramatically from week to week (Figure 2).  
 
  
 
10 Huang et al. (2017). 
11 Wanzala & Oloo (2019). 
12 Ministry of Health (2018b). 
13 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2018). See also U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2017); US President’s Malaria 
Initiative (2016). 
14 Muhindo et al (2016); Akhlaq et al (2016); Kumar et al (2017); Umezuruike et al (2017); Hutchinson et al (2018). 
15 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2019b). 
16 Ministry of Health (2018a).  
14 
 Figure 1: Monthly Outpatient Department and Inpatient Department Reporting Versus mTrac Weekly Surveillance 
Reporting FY 2015/16 - FY 2017/18 
 
 
Source: Ministry of Health. 2018. Annual Health Sector Performance Report 2017/18. Kampala: Ministry of Health.  
 
Figure 2: Weekly Facility Reporting Rates versus Malaria Cases 2015-2019 
 
 
Reporting Rate  
 Malaria Incidence   
15 
  
 
 
Source: Ministry of Health. 2019. Weekly Malaria Status - Uganda. Week 27. 1st July to 7th July 2019. Kampala: Ministry of 
Health.  
 
Weekly data enter the DHIS2 via mTrac, a basic mobile phone application that utilizes RapidSMS 
technology to submit routine, weekly health surveillance data - taken from the HMIS health facility 
surveillance paper register, Form 033b - on a range of indicators for notifiable disease, stock levels for 
eight tracer medicines, and maternal and neonatal deaths.17 Ideally, community health workers affiliated 
with the public sector (known as VHTs)18 should also be using mTrac to upload information from the 
VHT paper register, Form 095.  In 2017, UNICEF estimated that over 62,000 health workers are tasked 
with utilizing mTrac to upload health information, with plans to expand to 300,000 by 2020.19 However, 
even those VHTs who are currently tasked with reporting through mTrac are still not reporting at 
optimal levels and underlying infrastructure and cost issues remain a barrier.20 
 
From its early days, one of the primary and most explicit roles of mTrac has been to ensure real time 
tracking of malaria cases alongside stocks of artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) and malaria rapid 
diagnostic tests (mRDT).  MTrac’s prioritization of malaria is due to a number of reasons including:  
1. Malaria control programs’ unique surveillance needs for which monthly data alone have 
proven insufficient to catch upsurges in incidence cases 
2. The primary data source for the analysis of malaria trends is the HMIS Outpatient 
(OPD) department register (Form 031), as malaria cases are most frequently identified 
following a patient being evaluated at the primary health care (PHC) level for fever   
3. ACTs have unique concerns with respect to drug resistance and one way to preserve 
their efficacy is by tracking the conditions of their prescription to patients and whether 
or not a diagnosis of malaria has been confirmed by a lab test 
 
17 With respect to monthly and quarterly  reporting, by contrast, numerous other facility-level paper-based forms and 
registers serve as the data source for the DHIS2. For malaria specifically, two of the most important of these – besides the 
community form 097 described above - are the Out-Patient Department (OPD) Register Form 031 and the monthly HMIS 
Out-Patient Reporting Form 105 into which information from Form 031 is transferred from tally sheets. Other important 
reporting forms for malaria include the In-Patient Register (188) and its respective HMIS Reporting Form (108) and the 
Stock Card (115) and Stock Book for recording and reporting drug stocks respectively.  
18 VHT stands for “village health team” and, in Uganda, represents the equivalent of a community health worker (CHW). 
19 UNICEF (2017c) 
20 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2019b). 0102030405060708090100
050000100000150000200000250000300000350000
W10
W16
W21
W27
W32
W38
W43
W49
W7
W12
W18
W23
W29
W34
W4
W45
W50
W9
W14
W2
W25
W30
W36
W41
W47
W52
W10
W16
W21
W27
W32
W38
W43
W49
W7
W12
W18
W23
W29
W34
W4
W45
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Reporting rates Malaria cases
Sum of Malaria cases Sum of Reporting rates 
16 
 4. Reliance on lab tests for confirmation of malaria require mRDT stock levels to also be 
tracked 
Beyond Forms 033b, 095, 097 and 031, dozens of other registers and forms feed information into the 
DHIS2. Following the collection of this information, the weekly and monthly counts with respect to the 
indicators tracked by the paper forms are tallied by hand via other paper forms , and only then entered 
into the digitalized system, usually after transfer to district level, and aggregated, validated, and analyzed 
by district biostatisticians often working from other paper forms. The continued reliance on paper-based 
collection, recording, and transfer of information into the digitalize system is why the DHIS2 is 
characterized as “hybrid.”  
 
The reporting burden created by this dependency on paper is massive , especially as one travels lower 
down the health system where facilities are less likely to have specified data clerks handling paperwork 
and data management is done by clinical health workers themselves who are tasked with managing both 
facility reports and paperwork from attached VHTs. Additionally, the cost of printing and disseminating 
paper registers is also extremely high and born – to a large extent - by MoH development partners. 
Moreover, whenever HMIS indicators are updated, registers have to be reprinted in their entirety, also 
at great cost.  
 
Meanwhile, gaps in dissemination mean that new versions of registers and forms may not be consistently 
distributed, leading to some facilities reverting to old versions of paper forms. Technical or 
infrastructural issues (problems with electricity and mobile phone networks, lack of resources to buy 
fuel for generators, occasional glitches in the connector between mTrac and DHIS2) also lead to 
bottlenecks in the system, as do transportation and communication issues linking VHTs to facilities 
necessitating only quarterly contact.21  
 
Attempts have been made to overcome some of these hurdles through the introduction of electronic 
medical records (EMR), that ideally, should connect individual patient data to the HMIS.  EMRs – many of 
which are based on an OpenMRS system - are being implemented in some Health Center (HC) IIIs and 
IVs, as well as general hospitals.  Additionally, the IICS handles electronic data at for some RRHs and 
national referral hospitals. Both OpenMRS EMR at HCs and the hospital-based IICS are supported by 
PEPFAR funding. PEPFAR’s involvement, however, has meant that EMR at HC III and IV levels has so far 
been reserved for HIV/AIDS patients attached to ART hubs. While IICS is being linked to the HMIS and 
extends beyond HMIS, EMRs at HC level do not feed into the DHIS2 and do not yet capture other 
health issues such as malaria.  
 
Also, while public sector and private not-for-profit (PNFP) sector health facilities are integrated into this 
system of reporting, only a small proportion of private-for-profit (PFP) drug stores and facilities - from 
which over 50% of anti-malarial medicines are estimated to be obtained22 – are tracked, and only a 
fraction of these report into the DHIS2.23 This is problematic, as up to 60% of malaria patients seek 
their care in the private sector.24 
 
 
21 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2019b). 
22 ACT Watch et al (2017). 
23 O’Hanlon et al (2017). 
24 UBOS & ICF Macro (2019).  
17 
 Uganda’s new e-Health strategy mandates a shift toward total digitalization  and universal EMR for all 
patients,25 and several PEPFAR CDC implementing partners will be supporting their extension in 
supported facilities beyond clients with HIV. While it will be a number of years before this vision of 
100% digitalization is fully realized, and while infrastructural hurdles will continue to create bottlenecks, 
digitalization – one way or another - will eventually go to scale .  
 
PMI’s Investment in HMIS Strengthening  
PMI has been investing in HMIS strengthening since its inception in 2006. PMI HMIS investments seek to 
ensure that quality data are collected on malaria-related indicators in order to assess trends, highlight 
progress and challenges and guide programmatic activities by the Government of Uganda (GoU) and 
partners, including via PMI-funded direct and indirect technical assistance activities. 
 
PMI currently works to strengthen HMIS/DHIS2 at national and subnational levels to ensure that high 
quality and meaningful data is collected and used among all partners, including support to District Health 
Management Teams (DHMTs) to conduct supportive supervision, which includes an HMIS component, 
as well as to the Surveillance, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Operational Research Technical Working 
Group (SMEOR TWG), the Quarterly Malaria Bulletin, and data analysis and use workshops. At the 
same time, a review of PMI MOPs from 2016 onwards also shows that the HMIS support both within 
the MOPs’ narrative discussions and their respective budget table have remained relatively unchanged 
over the last three years (see Annex F: PMI MOPs Activities and Budget Tables).  
 
Funds are channeled through USAID to the NMCD at central level  via the USAID implementing partner 
Malaria Action Program for Districts (MAPD), as well as via an interagency agreement (IAA) through 
CDC to support two Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP) fellows. MAPD has also received co-
funding from the UK government’s Department for International Development’s (DfID) Strengthening 
Uganda’s Response to Malaria (SURMa) program, with the express intent of targeting community level  
interventions in the context of the Integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) activity and district 
systems strengthening activities (DS/S). This report will return to the continuity, sustainability and 
strategic implications of these varying levels of support at a later point. 
 
Sub-nationally, PMI channels HMIS support, in the main, along two channels. The first, again via MAPD, 
now targets 52 districts26 and affiliated facilities in West Nile, Mid-West, and Central regions that have, 
over the 15 years, been the focus of CDC PEPFAR implementing partners. Implementing partners in 
these regions include Baylor, TASO, Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI), Rakai District Health Services, 
and Makerere University School of Public Health (MUSPH) among others. The focus of CDC 
implementing partners at district level have, typically revolved around the intensive strengthening of the 
HIV/AIDS response, as well as - up until 2018 - the rapid scale up of systems to enhance maternal and 
neonatal survival. Malaria has not been a primary focus hence USAID/MAPD’s role in these districts. 
This issue will be returned later in this report, as it has bearing on potential strategic investment by PMI.  
 
The second channel has been through USAID Regional Health Integration to Enhance Services (RHITES) 
activities which operate in Eastern, East-Central, South West, Lango, and Acholi Regions. RHITES 
activities evolved from earlier regional activities which, likewise, had their focus in the HIV/AIDS 
 
25 Ministry of Health (2017). 
26 Since MAPD’s creation, the Government of Uganda has carried out redistricting on an almost annual basis. Thus, the 
number of districts falling under MAPD’s purview recently changed from 45 to 52 and will continue to change going 
forward.   
18 
 response but which now are meant to target a broad range of integrated health issues including malaria, 
maternal and child health, and nutrition. As such, the funding for each regional RHITES activity comes 
from several budget streams; however, PEPFAR funding still dominates and amounts to between 51% 
(e.g. RHITES-N Lango & Acholi) and 77% (e.g. RHITES-SW) of the respective RHITES’ budgets. Ideally, 
the common RHITES platform should guarantee a uniform USAID response across each region but, as 
each RHITES program is overseen by a different non-profit contractor, this is not necessarily the case. 
This issue will also be returned to later in this report, as it also has implications for strategic 
recommendations. 
 
Within the MOPS, budget lines for HMIS strengthening have, over the last three years, tended to 
revolve around the following categories: capacity building, supportive supervision, training, data audits, 
data quality assurance (DQA), and data analysis (Figure 3). 
 
Additionally, up until the most recent MOPs (2018/FY 2019), there has been a strategic focus on 
supporting the Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration’s (IDRC) 35 Malaria Reference Centers 
(MRCs) which were meant to serve as Centers of Excellence and Learning for malaria surveillance 
around the country. MRCs evolved from an original six malaria sentinel sites established in 2006/2007, 
and since expanded in 2014/15 and again in 2018.27 As gold standards for malaria surveillance, support to 
MRCs necessarily focused on often innovative data collection, analysis and utilization, and sought to 
 
27 Original MRC sentinal sites:  Apac, Jinja, Kabale, Kanungu, Mubende, Tororo.   Sites established in 2014/15: Agago, 
Alebtong, Amolatar, Amuru, Arua, Dokolo, Gulu, Kitgum, Kole, Lamwo, Nwoya, Omoro, Otuke, Oyam, Pader .  Sites 
established in 2018:  Busia, Gomba, Hoima, Kaabong, Kabarole, Kapchorwa, Katakwi, Kayunga, Kibaale, Koboko, Kyotera, 
Moroto, Nakaseke. 
National 
Districts 
Facilities 
via MAPD  
via MAPD or RHITES  
capacity building  
supportive supervision  
training 
supportive supervision  
data audits/DQA  
data analysis  
data audits/DQA  
Figure 3:  PMI Uganda HMIS Support, 2016-2018 
Adapted from PMI Uganda MOPs 2016/FY 2017 - 2018/FY 2019.   
19 
 leverage lessons from MRCs “to design a ‘minimum package’ for strengthening HMIS” to be then scaled 
to other centers. This minimum package was based on the collaborative improvement approach (CIA) 
and piloted with PMI funding - in partnership with MAPD - in facilities in Kayunga district.28 PMI funding 
for MRCs was discontinued in 2019 and PMI Uganda is now in the process of rethinking its strategic 
deployment of HMIS funding to be more purpose-driven.29 
 
Purpose of the Analysis 
Uganda’s Local Government Act of 1997 and its subsequent amendments have served to decentralize 
service delivery and devolve governance of a significant proportion of health sector activities - including 
promotion and prevention, clinical care, disease monitoring and surveillance, and environmental and 
public health - to district government, in particular, to District Health Management Teams (DHMTs). As 
such, the UMRSP’s Objective 5 and Objective 6 are focused on capacity building to improve the district-
level malaria response: 
● Objective 5:  Ensure that at least 90% of all districts report routinely on malaria program 
performance for decision making  
● Objective 6:  All malaria epidemic prone districts will have the capacity for epidemic 
preparedness and response.30 
At the heart of these objectives is improved district capacity to manage the DHIS2. 
 
The current USAID Uganda’s Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) has committed to 
the explicit strengthening of governance systems, structures, processes, and principles as one of three 
shared thematic pillars cross-cutting all intra-agency offices and units, including that of Health, 
Population, and Nutrition.31 Additionally, PMI’s Global Strategy (2015-2020) has made improving 
countries’ capacity to collect and use information as one of its five core areas of strategic focus, above 
and apart from simply siloed investing in data for malaria control and elimination alone.32 These goals 
align with WHO’s Global Technical Strategy for Malaria (2016-2030) which has, under “Pillar 3 - 
Transform Malaria Surveillance into a Core Intervention”, objectives such as “invest in routine 
information system” and “collect necessary data to understand disease trends and program 
performance.”33 
 
For these reasons, PMI Uganda has a strategic interest in maximizing its investments in both the national 
HMIS and the sub-national information platforms that feed into it. PMI has commissioned this landscape 
analysis to determine gaps in HMIS strengthening support to Uganda in order to help guide PMI’s 
investment in surveillance, monitoring and evaluation. 
 
Currently, PMI’s number one priority is the use of data to better allocate resources and continually 
improve impact. Thus, PMI wishes to optimize its contribution to HMIS strengthening in Uganda by 
investing available resources in interventions not currently supported by other donors, especially those 
with the highest impact on routine health data timeliness, quality and use. Opportunities for building on 
existing investments and initiatives for a synergistic impact were also of great interest. PMI was 
 
28 Karamagi et al (2017). 
29 IDRC has received National Institutes of Health (NIH) funding to continue the MRC model and expand in number to 60 
sites. 
30 Ministry of Health (2014)  
31 USAID Uganda (2016) 
32 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2015)  
33 WHO (2016).  
20 
 particularly interested in addressing the challenges surrounding data collection and use at the data entry 
level in both health facilities  and the community , the systemic issues of which have been described above 
and will be reiterated throughout this report. 
 
Key Questions 
In order to determine the most effective investments for strengthening Uganda’s national HMIS/DHIS-2, 
PMI was interested in answers to the following key questions: 
 
a. Which key inputs and processes are already supported by donors? In which geographical areas? 
Since HMIS strengthening is not a disease-specific intervention, this mapping should include 
investments from a broad list of donors (e.g. PEPFAR, other USAID and CDC programs, 
Department of Defense, DFID, Global Fund, GAVI, etc.). 
 
b. Which key inputs and processes, if strengthened, would lead to more timely reporting of malaria 
data, as well as optimal completeness, quality, and use at the health facility and community 
levels?34 
 
c. What are the gaps in supporting HMIS strengthening in Uganda and which of these gaps would 
make most sense for PMI to fill through existing mechanisms? 
 
The operationalization and conceptualization of these questions - including sub-questions - can be found 
in Annex C: Getting to Answers Matrix. The sequence of the questions has been reordered from the 
original SOW for the sake of logic. 
Methodology 
The full methodology for this review can be found in Annex D. In brief, this was a mixed-methods 
landscape analysis predominantly relying on qualitative data supported with quantitative evidence to 
understand programmatic and financial gaps in the present landscape of development assistance for 
Uganda’s HMIS/DHIS-2, particularly with respect to timely, complete, high quality malaria data and its 
utilization for evidence-based decision-making at sub-national level. The focus was on identifying these 
gaps, explaining and exploring the reasons for these gaps, and then translating findings into a strategic 
direction for future PMI HMIS investments, especially in the context of limited resources. 
 
The work relied predominantly on a) a review of key GoU, PMI, USG agency, and partner documents 
supplemented by literature sourced from PubMed and Google Scholar; b) key informant (KI) interviews 
at national level; and c) targeted quantitative analysis of HMIS/DHIS-2 malaria data at district and facility 
level. 
 
With respect to key informant interviews, key stakeholders were contacted in the financing, 
implementation, and management of the national HMIS, especially with respect to malaria, based on 
previous consultation with PMI. Table 1 describes the key informants from each category who were 
contacted, and those that were ultimately available for interview. 
 
 
34 Annex C provides a general list of inputs and processes, which can be reviewed and adapted to the Ugandan context.  
21 
  
Category Key Informants  
Available  Unavailable  
Government of Uganda ● MoH National Malaria Control Division  ● MoH Resource Centre/Division of Health 
Information  
USG ● USAID Uganda Strategic Information 
Team 
● CDC Health Information System Team   
Development Partners  ● DfID ● Global Fund  
Technical Agencies ● UNICEF ● WHO 
● CHAI 
Implementing Partners ● Malaria Action Program for 
Districts/Malaria Consortium  
● USAID RHITES - SW 
● USAID RHITES-E 
● USAID RHITES-EC 
● USAID RHITES-N Lango 
● USAID RHITES-N Acholi 
● USAID/SSS SITES  
● IDRC 
● Frontline Program  ● TASO 
● Field Epidemiology Training Program 
(CDC/FETP)  
● CDC/MUSPH METS 
 
Category-specific, semi-structured interview guides were developed to prompt stakeholder discussion 
as to relevant key issues: bottlenecks to reporting/utilization, current investment landscape, gaps in the 
investment landscape, and ideas on strategic investment opportunities. These guides are available in 
Annex E and were not meant as closed-ended surveys but rather as a series of prompts to ensure that 
key informants touch upon all themes relevant to that particular category of stakeholder. Transcripts 
from interview notes and existing documentation were analyzed thematically, using codes assigned a 
priori based on the landscape analysis questions and, via grounded theory, emerging themes developed 
collectively over the duration of the fieldwork.  
 
Secondary datasets reviewed for evidence-based strategic recommendations included DHIS2, the 
Malaria Indicator Survey (MIS), Malaria Quarterly Reports from 2016-2019, Annual Health Sector 
Performance Reports (AHSPR), Health Services District League Tables, Weekly Epidemiology and 
Surveillance Reports, and any other relevant data sources. These were analyzed for location/level of 
health facility variance and trends in order to answer specific questions about patterns in timeliness, 
completeness, and quality over time so as to strengthen the evidence base for recommendations for 
strategic investment. 
 
This analysis focused only on elements relevant to mTrac, DHIS2, HMIS and data utilization at facility 
and district level. A number of m-Health or e-Health initiatives were not included in the review due to 
either time constraints or lack of relevance to the objectives.  These include: 
● Mobile health initiatives other than mTrac (personal messaging, SBCC) 
● e-Health or m-Health pilots without clear plans for scale or integration,  
● The Human Resources for Health Information System (HRHS)  
● The Logistics Management Information System (LMIS)  
● The Warehouse Management System (WMS) 
● The hospital-based Integrated Intelligent Computer System (IICS) 
  
22 
 With respect to the HRHS, LMIS, WMS, and IICS however, there are plans by the MoH to eventually 
achieve integration of these systems with HMIS. Indeed, their eventual integration is absolutely 
necessary since - to a certain extent - all these information systems should serve to reinforce and inform 
each other. This review, therefore, necessarily refers back to them at later points, even though these 
were not a specific focus of reading, quantitative analysis or interviews. 
 
Additional limitations encountered include: 
1. Time constraints for the landscape analysis - and public holidays over the course of the research 
- meant that not all stakeholders could be interviewed during the time allotted. Additionally, 
some stakeholders did not respond to either phoned or emailed requests for interviews, and 
several missed appointments.  For this reason, some critical viewpoints were missed. 
2. Tracing financial contributions by donors was extremely difficult. There is no single source for 
any donor information with respect to malaria, let alone specific contributions to HMIS. Donors 
categorize their financial reporting differently. Some are very clear what the money was for 
(“training of 112 district HMIS officers”). Others just group all activities under “HMIS systems” 
or, more generally, “health systems strengthening” which includes a number of other activities 
not related to the information system. 
3. All the partners report activities differently, using different reporting schedules and 
terminologies, and those operating under grant cycles are not by year, but by chunk of time (e.g. 
2015-2017), most of which don’t overlap neatly.  
4. Reporting for a single partner sometimes changed over time (i.e. PEPFAR accounts for its 
budgeting very differently in 2019 than it did in 2017).  Additionally, some of the budget 
allocations cover the entire country, others cover specific districts, still others cover “central” 
(i.e. the Ministry of Health in general or the National Malaria Control Program specifically).  
5. Due to confidentiality issues, USAID was unable to provide the team with certain budgetary 
information with respect to USG investments in the HMIS, in particular for PEPFAR 2018/FY 
2019, and for money flowing through maternal and child health and family planning. 
 
   
23 
 Findings 
Analysis Question 1:  Mapping Existing Donor Support 
Which of key inputs and processes are already supported by donors? In which geographical areas? Since 
HMIS strengthening is not a disease-specific intervention, this mapping should include investments from 
a broad list of donors (e.g. PEPFAR, other USAID and CDC programs, Department of Defense, DFID, 
Global Fund, GAVI, etc.) 
 
All major donors/development partners to the health sector support HMIS strengthening, although not 
all of these partners work downstream, and many – if not most – work in the context of silos .  Figure 4 
maps these relationships with respect to the HMIS strengthening activities that intersect – in one way or 
another – with malaria programming, looking at funding flows from donor (hexagons), through financing 
initiatives (silos), development agencies (pentagons), projects/activities (ovals), implementing partners 
(rectangles), to districts, facilities, and communities (diamonds) or, alternately, to the central MoH 
(cross).   
 
Figure 4:  Map of Development Partner Support to the National HMIS/DHIS2 by Donor, Agency, Program, and 
Level 
Program Silos 
The map includes not only funding to malaria-specific activities, but also to HIV/AIDS or maternal and 
child health activities, regional health integrated activities, integrated community case management 
(iCCM), and performance- or results-based financing (PBF/RBF), as well as toward facility-based projects 
that support IT infrastructure or electronic medical records. These non-PMI/non-malaria funding 
streams were selected based on two critical issues importance of importance to this analysis: 
 
24 
 a) Information for the DHIS2 is generated and entered is – in general – at the level of the lower-
level health facility (HCs II-IV) and the space within which it is generated is the clinical 
interaction between health worker and patient. Malaria is detected and recorded within this 
interaction, but so to are a whole host of other health issues. Therefore, HMIS activities 
targeting information related to HIV, maternal or child health, etc. necessarily target facility-level 
processes in which malaria is considered simultaneously.   
b) Within RBF, iCCM and other programs that ultimately seek to improve performance of PHC 
service delivery, malaria is one of the main health issues targeted by these services and, 
therefore, improving malaria outcomes is always one of the primary objectives, even if these 
programs themselves are not specifically falling under a “malaria” silo 
Note that the MoH financing passes first through Ministry of Financing, Planning and Economic 
Development (MoFPED), a relationship not portrayed on the map.  
 
The map also indicates several future funding streams that are of relevance to malaria program 
investment in the HMIS. The first is a multi-country Rockefeller Grant to UNICEF that will finance a 
pilot of digitalized community health worker information systems. Uganda along with India are the first 
countries in which this activity will be rolled out, and – as of now – UNICEF plans to implement in five 
districts with hope to scale.  The second is, as indicated earlier, NIH support to the expansion of IDRC’s 
MRCs from 35 to 60. MRCs seek to serve as a gold standard for malaria surveillance, so data quality 
assurance, reporting, and utilization will be a central component of this funding, although the primary 
objective of MRCs is to generate data for IDRC and partner research, with broader health systems 
strengthening an explicit aspiration but not a goal. 
 
Additionally, there may be other implementing partners through which financing for HMIS strengthening 
has flowed that are not represented here, either because there was not space on the map for them, or 
because it was difficult to figure out whether they were directly contracted by donors for these 
activities or sub-contracted by implementing partners (e.g. USAID ASSIST which has carried out well-
documented malaria data strengthening activities). 
 
This map does not include investment by partners in other HMIS systems above and apart from the 
DHIS2 – most notably the LMIS and HRHIS mentioned in the introduction - nor do any of the figures 
that follow.  Additionally, while funding to the hospital-based IICS is likely covered by the map, the 
analysis did not set out to map funding to this system. This was due to the limited time allocated for the 
assignment and the fact that these systems were not included in the SOW for the landscape analysis.  
However, it should be noted that Uganda’s e-Health policy prioritizes interoperability of systems  and, 
presently, these and many other information systems in the Ugandan health sector are not integrated 
and function largely independently from each other .  There have been a number of studies looking at the 
potential for integration – especially with respect to the HMIS, LMIS, and IICS – including a number 
carried out by USAID/Uganda implementing partners. As with digitalization, then, the trajectory that the 
country will take toward systems integration is important to keep in mind when thinking about 
investments into the HMIS in the medium- to long-term .35 
 
With respect to funding targeting central level,  in many instances, the financing is earmarked to specific 
programs within the MoH including, but not limited to, the NMCD, Aids Control Program (ACP), 
National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Programme (NTLP), and Uganda National  Expanded Program on 
 
35 SIAPS (2014); Village Reach (2017); Bergum (2017).  
25 
 Immunization (UNEPI). Indeed, the ACP and UNEPI - both of which have access to significant financing 
from external partners for data activities - are critical stakeholders in Uganda’s national HMIS. The 
relationship between such program silos and the MoH’s Division of Health Information (DHI) which is 
tasked with coordinating the collection, validation, dissemination and utilization of all health data in the 
country – and, yet, which is not targeted with the same volume of resources  - is sometimes sub-optimal. 
Indeed, DHI is notably underfunded and this issue will be returned to later in this analysis.  
Chains of Referral 
While Figure 4 shows how financing for HMIS strengthening is able to link donors to implementing 
partners to districts and facilities via the MoH and local government, it is not able to show how 
investment links levels of the health system. This is, in part, because investment is fundamentally focused 
on strengthening the vertical relationship between data and the DHIS2. Data connections between 
different levels of facilities – critical to maintaining strong linkages in the chain of referral - are therefore 
sometimes neglected.  
 
This is unfortunate since, as explained in the introduction, the chain of referral for the Ugandan health 
system involves patients being seen by a VHT who then, if required, refers a patient to an HC II. The 
HC II, in turn, links the patient to an HC III and on up to HC IVs, referral hospitals and beyond. 
Theoretically, the HMIS should facilitate these links too, as HC IIs oversee VHTs and would benefit from 
information collected at community level (just as HC IIIs would benefit from the information collected 
by HC IIs in their catchment areas).  
 
However, as financing tends to focus on strengthening individual links of this chain, not the chain itself, 
the substantial investment in iCCM by partners often wholly focuses on VHT data collection which, in 
most instances, is also collected via paper and then either entered directly via mTrac (a system not yet 
to scale) or, more likely, delivered quarterly to the facility and then immediately moves into the 
DHIS2.36 With the exception of the HIV/AIDS silo,  the most proximate institutions that might benefit 
from that data (HC IIs and IIIs) do not interact meaningfully with community data until (hopefully) it 
comes back down from the DHIS2. As of yet, there is limited partner support for improving 
interconnectivity and joint utilization of data between levels of primary health care. 
  
 
36 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2019b).  
26 
 Sustainability  
Malaria control and elimination in Uganda is supported by a number of development partners, among 
which USG plays a significant role, albeit a distant second to Global Fund financing (Figure 5). With 
respect to domestic spending on malaria, more than 80% of funding goes to management, human 
resources, and technical assistance (Figure 6), with government financing for information systems not 
significant enough to feature on the World Health Organization Uganda malaria profile. 
 
 
 
Historically however, USG investment has represented a massive proportion of financing for HMIS 
strengthening.  Although the full financial data on USG support was not made available for this analysis 
(most significantly, the FY 2019 PEPFAR budget and all USG funding flowing through Maternal and Child 
Health (MCH) and Family Planning), it is estimated that at least 40% of funding from external financing for 
HMIS strengthening comes via USG, and likely considerably more (Figure 7). Note: in the absence of 
comprehensive financial information and more robust analysis this estimate could change significantly.37  
 
  
 
37 MCH financing, for example, had to be derived from estimating from PEPFAR SITES budget, as SITES receives 50% of its 
budget from PEPFAR, and around 40% from MCH/family health. In the absence of the PEPFAR 2018/FY 2019 COP budget 
table, the analysis summed 2017 and 2019 budget tables, divided by three, added 1/3 to the total sum to get estimated 
SITES PEPFAR funding from 2017 to 2019. It then, recognizing PEPFAR was 50% of the budget for SITES, doubled to get 
100% and then calculated 40% from this to represent MCH funding. For this reason, this analysis talks about “estimated” 
and “at least” and overall percentage of contribution, and not amount of funding in dollars as the actual funding number 
are not possible to calculate and would be certainly inaccurate. 
Figure 5: Sources of Financing for Malaria, 2005 -2017. 
Source: World Health Organization. 2018. Uganda Malaria Profile.  
Figure 6: Government Expenditure by Intervention.  
Source: World Health Organization. 2018. Uganda Malaria Profile.   
27 
 Figure 7:  Snapshot of Estimated Proportion of Development Partner HMIS/Data Financing, 2017 - present38 
 
 
With respect to support for HMIS strengthening related to specifically weekly malaria surveillance and 
the capture of monthly malaria data within the DHIS2, funding flows through both the NMCD and a 
number of implementing partners. The proportion of funding is presented in Figure 8 which represents 
HMIS budget lines through the main malaria financing channels: PMI, Global Fund, and DfID SURMa.  
  
 
38 Sources: PEPFAR (2017). PEPFAR (2019). US President’s Malaria Initiative (2016); US President’s Malaria Initiative 
(2017); US President’s Malaria Initiative (2018). Global Fund (2014a). Global Fund (2014b).Global Fund (2014c).Global 
Fund ( 2014d); Global Fund (2014e); IDRC (2019); World Bank (2016); Healey et al (2019); GAVI (2015); DfID (2016); 
DfID (2017); BTC (2017); Delegation of the European Union to Uganda (2015); Gates Foundation (2019). 
Estimated  
proportion of 
USG support to 
the HMIS  
28 
 Figure 8:  Proportion of Funding Received by USG Implementing Partners for HMIS Strengthening Activities 
Related to Malaria, 2017 – present.  
 
Sources: PEPFAR (2017). PEPFAR (2019). US President’s Malaria Initiative (2016); US President’s Malaria Initiative (2017); US 
President’s Malaria Initiative (2018); DfID (2016); DfID (2017);  IDRC (2019). 
 
The most recent Global Fund grant round financing for Resilient and Sustainable Systems for Health  
(RSSH) was directed almost entirely to the NMCD in recognition of the role which malaria case 
management plays in the context of overall case management at primary health level. DfID, by contrast, 
channeled much of its information systems funding to malaria through either UNICEF or the 
USAID/MAPD. DfID funding to HMIS strengthening via malaria programming was divided into roughly 
three streams:  
1. Through UNICEF, DfID met most of the operational costs of mTrac since mTrac’s 
inception. This financing has been discontinued and the MoH is now expected to assume 
costs.  A transition plan is being put in place, and numerous cost recovery options have 
been tabled.  
2. Through MAPD, DfID financed iCCM at community level. This included training VHTs for 
data capture, reporting and utilization at community level.   
Also through MAPD, DfID financed activities related to District Support/Strengthening 
(DS/S) of which DQA and data reviews are included.39  
 
Both iCCM and DS/S financing have also been drawn to a close. As mentioned in the methodology 
section, compiling financial information for this analysis was extremely difficult and funding levels 
presented here should be assumed to be incomplete. That said, it is likely SURMa funding has 
represented up to 30% of overall malaria funding going to HMIS systems. This is concerning as SURMa 
 
39 MAPD, however, is also carrying out these activities with PMI funds as well. Without access to detailed organizational 
financial information, it was impossible for this analysis to differentiate the exact amounts spent by MAPD on HMIS 
activities  coming from USAID PMI versus DfID SURMa.   
 
29 
 comes to an end and there is a great deal of uncertainty  with respect to the availability of DfID bilateral 
financing in the future.    
District Over-Representation 
Additionally, this landscape analysis was tasked with mapping where HMIS support was targeted sub-
nationally. Originally, the team hoped to do heat mapping directly onto a map of the districts of Uganda.  
This effort proved to be very messy, so the information below is presented in tabular form, looking at 
the volume of HMIS strengthening projects (including iCCM), per district, per region (Figure 7). Again, 
this covers all funding streams and programs that have targeted the HMIS, not just malaria. The map 
below would also include support coming from GAVI, Global Financing Fund (GFF), DfID, Global Fund, 
European Union, PEPFAR and others which, again, may have only strengthened elements of district- and 
community-level data systems relevant to their specific programmatic interests. Thus, this map includes 
the funding of any activity-related to the data cycle from the purchase of hardware to providing funds for 
support supervision to technical support for the implementation of electronic medical records (EMR) to 
the financing of data reviews to improve data utilization for decision making (in the case of European 
Union, for example, the focus was on data utilization and governance). Note: it was difficult to obtain 
comprehensive information for this map, so the number of partners supporting routine data collection 
in each district is likely to be more than what is portrayed here. 
 
Figure 9: Heat “Map” of Number of Implementing Partners (IPs) Supporting HMIS Strengthening Per District, Per 
Region (2017-2019).  
 
 
The map classifies districts per number of partners who carry out HMIS strengthening with the darkest 
green representing nine or more partners and the lightest green representing one partner. Clearly, 
some districts are over-represented with respect to volume of HMIS strengthening activities going into 
them. As mentioned earlier, in many instances, these activities are siloed according to the programmatic 
interests of the funder (e.g. GAVI financing for HMIS activities will support MoH-led data capture and 
# of 
IPs 
doing 
HMIS  
30 
 review related to UNEPI), so it should not be assumed that districts with multiple partners necessarily 
have duplication of activities. Also, “HMIS strengthening” in a district might refer to a single round of 
training or data review over the course of a five-year program.  
 
In the next section, the report will explore whether it is possible to combine measures of overall 
performance, data performance, malaria burden, and volume of health sector support, in order to 
identify those districts that – in spite of the challenges they face with endemicity – are actually 
reasonably well off with respect to data.  Targeting could then either bypass such districts or, alternately, 
strategically target only the poor performing facilities within . 
Inputs and Processes 
Finally, the landscape analysis was tasked with fully understanding what activities partners actually do 
with respect to HMIS strengthening. Figure 8 shows the steps involved in implementing a robust national 
information system, and the activities that partners might invest in to achieve these steps. The finding of 
this analysis is that, in most instances, if a partner is investing in the national HMIS, they are investing in 
the entire system.    
 
Figure 10: HMIS Strengthening Activities  
 
In a few exceptions, a partner will only support low level inputs to logistics or hardware (e.g. KOICA 
financing computers and generators in a very small handful of districts) or extremely high level inputs 
into data utilization (e.g. EU support to national data reviews toward health governance and policy 
development). In still other instances, partners will focus on robust health information systems only in 
the context of their particular program without necessarily tying this information to the national HMIS 
(e.g. Living Goods and BRAC community health workers which strengthen routine data capture of 
community level health information, including information on malaria, without reporting into the 
DHIS2).  
 
31 
  
The reality is, however, that such narrow support is rare.  Most partners work to improve data quality 
by training facility workers and district biostatisticians to better understand new indicators. Most 
partners provide facility- and district-level training to improve data capture, data entry, and reporting. 
Almost all partners support data validation and cleaning exercises, provide resources for supportive 
supervision visits and phone calls, and train on data analysis. Most partners sponsor data review and 
facility and district planning exercises.  
Level of Support 
The larger issue, then, is at what points in the health system support is targeted. Examining the map of 
partner support to districts (Figure 4 above) with respect to overall HMIS systems strengthening, 
funding overwhelmingly flows to: 
 
1. Central level programs – NMCD, ACP, NTLP, UNEPI – and capacity building within 
2. District level capacity building 
3. Regional Referral and District Hospitals with respect to capacity and electronic medical records 
(ICCS) 
4. Health Center (HC) IIIs and IVs as these serve as ART hubs for PEPFAR and, increasingly, utilize 
electronic medical records (EMR) to manage HIV patients. They also have maternity wards and 
so are the target of MCH financing and data on maternal survival. 
5. Communities in the context of iCCM 
 
Missing here are HC IIs situated at parish level which represent the lowest level facilities in the health 
system. While HC IIs do not have lab capacity, ideally, they have access to mRDTs so malaria case 
management will be a critical part of health workers’ activities. Additionally, HC IIs – for now - are 
staffed by nurses and have no more than one to two health workers on site. At HC IIs, there is no 
chance that the burden of data capture and reporting will be lessened – as in the case of higher-level 
health facilities – by the presence of a program-supported data clerk/manager. In HC II settings , all 
DHIS2 reporting efforts will fall to an individual who is simultaneously supposed to provide clinical care 
(thus, DHIS2 data entry will necessarily involve a de-prioritization of patients).  
 
HC IIs are not well supported by existing donors or initiatives targeting the HMIS because a) they do 
not serve as PEPFAR-supported ART hubs; b) they usually do not have maternity wards; c) if GAVI-
funded immunization happens on site, it will do so only in the context of a campaign and not involve 
routine data collection; d) PMI-funded HMIS strengthening activities have often been based on “cascade” 
or “training of trainer” models thus focus on higher level institutions, with the intention that knowledge 
will be transferred downwards (or alternately, they target facilities that have data clerks/ managers on 
staff); e) there is an existing policy window that encourages direct support to communities via VHTs. 
 
While there are currently discussions underway to change the role of HC IIs to eventually serve as sites 
through which Community Health Extension Workers (CHEW) – rather than nurses - oversee and 
manage a cadre of VHTs, the gap in support will still continue to exist as long as this level of the 
Ugandan health system has no direct relationship to a program silo.   
   
The findings from this section highlight several important issues for PMI strategic investment in the 
national HMIS which will be followed up in subsequent sections of this report.  
32 
 Summary 
 There is already significant investment in HMIS strengthening by partners, particularly USG 
partners, but support is often siloed, specific to the programmatic objectives of the funder and 
implementer, and not systems-wide. 
 Most of the significant implementing partners – both for malaria and outside of malaria - are 
already supporting all key HMIS inputs and processes  (in particular, PEPFAR-funded partners) at 
almost all levels of the health system (communities, HC IIIs and IVs, hospitals, districts, NMCD).  
 USG investment is so important to the overall HMIS that, in its absence, it would be difficult for 
the MoH to cover costs. Thus, sustainability of efforts is questionable. 
 DfID financing also supports a large proportion of national, non-siloed district-level capacity 
building for the DHIS2 and for community level data capture, but there is the strong possibility 
that DfID financing will begin to dry up as UKAID increasingly shifts away from bilateral 
programs to multilateral, multi-country initiatives. If this happens there will be a significant gap in 
funding for subnational information systems strengthening in the medium-term future. 
 Some districts may be receiving disproportionate HMIS strengthening activities and it is unclear 
whether such activities are universally needed or if better targeting can take place 
 A massive gap in financing and partner support exists at HC II level  because HC IIs do not easily 
fit into programmatic silos. 
 
*** 
 
Analysis Question 2:  Key Inputs and Processes 
What are the key inputs and processes that, if strengthened, would lead to more timely reporting of 
malaria data, as well as optimal timeliness, quality, and use at the health facility and community levels? 
As discussed above, issue is really not which inputs or processes into the national HMIS are supported – 
as partners tend to support across the entire data cycle  – but rather: 
1) Whether these inputs and processes are supported more generally or within a program silo 
2) What level of the health system such support targets 
3) Whether or not PMI support can improve its strategic deployment of its HMIS budget 
Several key findings were suggested in the partner mapping that this report will now explore further.  
Redirecting Support to HC IIs 
The first is with respect to the implications of gaps in partner support for HC IIs. In many regions, HC 
IIs represent the majority of primary health facilities (Figure 11).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
33 
 Figure 11: HC IIs as a Proportion of Total Public Sector HCs 
 
 
 
When comparing, however, the proportion of HC IIs in a region to regional monthly data completeness 
rates (Figure 12) and regional weekly data timeliness rates (Figure 13), there is a significant relationship 
between those regions with the highest proportion of HC IIs and overall reporting performance.40 
 
Figure 12: Proportion of Facilities that are HC IIs per Region Compared to Regional Monthly Data 
Completeness as Reported in DHIS2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 Annex G describes the outcomes of the Anova tests for significance of data feeding into Figures 10 and 11. 
 
34 
 Figure 13 : Proportion of Facilities that are HC IIs per Region Compared to Weekly Data Timeliness as 
Reported in mTrac 
 
 
 
Of course, regional data can present a slightly over-aggregated picture, with district outliers skewing 
outcomes. Heat mapping HC IIs as a proportion of total health facilities, however, shows that skewing is 
not necessarily happening. Figure 14 demonstrates that all districts in Acholi and Busoga regions– along 
with Kampala – have a disproportionate number of HC IIs with no real outlier districts. 
 
Additional research would need to be carried out to confirm this link, as additional drivers of poor 
reporting might also vary considerably by region. Still, this data coupled with findings related to level of 
partner investment suggest that HC IIs represent a considerable gap in HMIS investment.  
   
Figure 14:  Heat Map of Proportion of HC IIs by District 
 
35 
 Improving Regional Targeting 
Following from this, the second question raised in the previous section related to the density of partner 
support for HMIS strengthening in each district and whether or not the number of activities influenced, 
not only malaria outcomes, but also district performance with respect to data reporting and overall 
district health sector performance. This issue is important as it relates to whether or not improved data 
systems, in turn, improve utilization. As will be discussed at length in the next section utilization is 
presently only really routinely assessed by proxy via the District League Tables (DLTs) published 
annually in the MoH’s Annual Health Sector Performance Reports. 
 
DLT methodology – as will be outlined below – is problematic for a number of reasons. However, In 
the absence of a standardized, routine measure of data utilization, DLTs can at least highlight important 
areas for further inquiry.  For example, comparing overall district performance with district reporting 
indicators, and then in turn to malaria incidence, it is clear that - in a few instances - some of the 
districts with the very worst burden of malaria are high performers - at least at district level - with 
respect to reporting timeliness and completeness, as well as overall performance (Figure 15).   
 
For example, some of the highest malaria burden in Uganda is in the north of the country.  At the same 
time, some of the districts with high malaria burden – e.g. Adjumani, Moyo, Oyam, Nebbi, and Koboko – 
according to the DLTs are still performing well. Moreover, going back to Figure 9, while Nebbi, Oyam 
and Koboko have a critical mass of partners supporting various HMIS strengthening in their districts, 
Adjumani and Moyo do not, yet still sit at the top of the DLT.  
 
These sorts of observations may, in fact, be entirely coincidental. Yet, in the context of a limited budget 
for HMIS strengthening, it is important to look at disparate sets of systems data together – above and 
beyond malaria indicators - in order to ask questions that may allow for improved targeting.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
36 
 Figure 15: Heat Maps Comparing Malaria Incidence, DLT Performance, Monthly Reporting 
Completeness and Weekly Reporting Timeliness, 2018 
 
 
Additionally, frequent – often annual - redistricting  by the Government of Uganda, means that new 
DHMTs are constantly being created, without any clear means of assessing impact on performance. In 
many instances, new districts are created out of districts already performing poorly, as well as having a 
high malaria burden. Constellations of factors such as these (new district + pre-redistricting poor 
 
 
 
District League Table Performance, 2018  
Source: AHSPR 2017/18  
Weekly DHIS2 Reporting Timeliness, 2018  
Source: AHSPR 2017/18  
Malaria Incidence by District, 2018  
Source: DHIS2  
HMIS Data Completeness,  2018  
Source: AHSPR 2017/18  
75.00-75.40 
75.40-81.40 
81.40-88.90 
88.90-95.60 
95.60-98.20 
98.20-100.00 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
Low  
37 
 performance + malaria burden) could also be used as means of better targeting HMIS strengthening 
financing. 
Private Sector 
It is estimated that up to 80% of Ugandans seek health care within the private-for-profit (PFP) sector, 
with an estimated 50% of all antimalarials distributed via private drug stores serving as first points of 
care, often the absence of mRDT tests.41 Acknowledging the key role that PFPs play in malaria case 
management, the UMRSP commits NMCD and partners to engaging private sector providers and drug 
shops, acknowledging that unrestricted access to ACTs in the absence of a confirmatory test may lead 
to widespread artemisinin resistance.42 This commitment is also reflected in consecutive PMI MOPs.43 
Numerous initiatives have been undertaken in Uganda to engage the private sector, including with 
respect to malaria control and prevention.44 These include the Private Sector Co-Payment Mechanism 
through the Affordable Medicines Facility for Malaria (AMFm) that greatly increased quality assured 
ACTs via the private sector from 11.3% in 2010 to 65.5% in 2011, alongside other pilots to introduce 
mRDTs at point-of-purchase.45  
 
While engagement of PFPs in malaria case management has been making progress, albeit via pilots and 
partner programs, PFP participation in the DHIS2 and HMIS more generally remains sub-optimal, a 
situation not unique to Uganda.46  The MoH DHI has a database on PFPs, but this database has not been 
updated in some time. Additionally, Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI) has been conducting regular 
private medicine outlet surveys (2014 and 2016) as part of a partnership with USAID’s Strengthening 
Health Outcomes through the Private Sector (SHOPS) activity.47 These surveys involve a growing 
baseline list of private sector facilities, including drug shops. However, in interviews, it was estimated 
that this list amounted to less than 15% of total PFPs in the country, and less than 10% of providers on 
this list were reporting into the DHIS2. These numbers could not be confirmed and should be 
considered anecdotal. However, it should be noted that every PMI MOPs for the last 3 years have 
included supporting partners to improve PFP participation in the national HMIS at both national and 
district levels, and it continues to be difficult not only to incentivize PFP participation in the national 
HMIS, but even to simply track them at scale.48 Challenges include a) profit motives driving an 
unwillingness to invest in/divert staff to manage data needs; b) fear of data driving government 
interference; c) rapid turnover of staff at facilities and shops; and d) volatility in the PFP market, with 
many small shops opening and shutting down throughout the year.  
 
A recent systematic literature review on strategies for engaging PFPs in malaria surveillance in numerous 
countries found that most countries did not mandate PFPs to report into the HMIS and included no 
findings on what steps to take to improve participation.49 The only country the review found that did 
require reporting – Swaziland – focused on MoH document from 2013 and did not explain how 
 
41 Awor et a (2012); ACTWatch Group (2016); ACTWatch et al (2017). 
42 Ministry of Health (2014). 
43 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2018). U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2017); US President’s Malaria Initiative 
(2016). 
44 ACTWatch et al (2017). 
45 Cohen et al (2012); Willey et al (2014). 
46 Bennett et al (2017) 
47 Lam et al (2019). 
48 U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2018). U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative (2017); US President’s Malaria Initiative 
(2016). 
49 Bennett et al (2017).  
38 
 mandatory reporting was achieved, except regular site visits by the MoH to PFPs.50 The review 
recommendations were: 
 Conduct research on how to better engage the private sector  
 Increase site visits to PFP facilities 
 Development of incentivie and disincentive structures (such as social francishing 
opportunities, pay-for-performance opportunities) 
 Tie licensing and accreditation to reporting  
 Restrict access to commodity subsidies if no reporting takes place 
 Include private providers in training opportunities. 
 Make malaria a notifiable disease 
 Provide the private sector with simple reporting tools 
 Share ideas on how to engage the private sector with regional partners.51 
Note: In the case of Uganda, all but “d) tie licensing and accreditation to reporting” already have been 
tried either by government or by partners.   
Defining Utilization 
The rollout of DHIS2 in 2012 is believed, anecdotally, by some to have helped improve evidence-based 
decision making in Uganda’s health sector.52 Nevertheless, issues regarding the problem of sub-national 
data utilization continue to be raised repeatedly by the MoH and its partners, both with respect to 
malaria data and health data more generally.53  Both the literature and transcripts from stakeholder 
interviews tend to classify these bottlenecks to utilization as falling under one of two broad categories. 
 
The first category refers to the technical and/or logistical bottlenecks that stem from either capacity or 
resources shortfalls.54  These would include 
1) Lack of resources to hold consistent quarterly and monthly data reviews (at community, facility, 
district, and central levels) 
2) Lack of capacity of end users to make decisions about what constitutes meaningful data  
3) Lack of capacity of end users to analyze data 
4) Lack of capacity, resources, and tools to disseminate information in a meaningful way 
5) Lack of capacity of end users to identify problems with data 
6) Lack of resources to mount remedial actions when red flags are detected in data. 
 
These bottlenecks tend to be addressed with technical interventions - financing DQAs, training, 
supportive supervision, in-kind incentives (airtime, etc.).  What is not mentioned when referring to 
these technical bottlenecks to utilization, however, is the fact that data utilization, itself, is rarely 
measured in a consistent, standardized way, especially with respect to the utilization of non-HIV data , 
apart from implementing partners’ own project MEL frameworks. For example, USAID Uganda’s SDS 
activity (2010-2016) included the roll out of a District Operational Plan (DOP) component, the 
evaluation of which measured data utilization via the presence of HMIS data within DOPs,55 but this was 
in the context of an external assessment of SDS, not routine information collected by the MoH. SDS, 
 
50 Ibid. 
51 Ibid. 
52 Kiberu et al (2014); Huang et al (2017). 
53 Muhindo et al (2016); Huang et al (2017); Umezuruike et al (2107); NMCD et al (2018). Ngabirano et al. (2017). 
54 Ibid. 
55 Kibombo et al (2016).  
39 
 moreover, was rolled out in only 64 of Uganda’s 112 districts, and the evaluation only looked at a small 
proportion of these.   
When it comes to routine assessment of sub-national date use, utilization tends to be inferred based on 
district performance which, in turn, is measured – as mentioned above - via the DLT annual rankings in 
Uganda’s AHSPR.56 DLT methodology has been employed by the MoH since 2003, long before DHIS2, 
and has been criticized for over-summarization, lack of detail, and decontextualized presentation of 
information.57 While, the roll out of DHIS2 has allowed the annual DLT to draw from a routine set of 
monthly data generated from every district, hospital and Health Center IV in Uganda, and backed up by 
the inclusion of indicators on monthly data completeness and timeliness of reporting, the DLT continues 
to be a proxy measure only.  
 
Meanwhile, other utilization activities have focused on both the training of health workers at HC IIIs and 
IVs as well as district biostatisticians and program focal points on the collection and analysis of program-
relevant data for decision making, including both MoH and partner-driven DQA and data utilization 
workshops and review meetings.  These include: 
 
Activity Financing  
SITES USAID PEPFAR & other USAID funding streams  
METS (Makerere University/UCSF)  CDC PEPFAR  
RHITES activities USAID PEPFAR & other USAID funding streams  
Frontline FETP  CDC PEPFAR, other CDC funding, Gates Foundation  
ASSIST PEPFAR & other USAID funding streams  
MAPD USAID PMI and DfID SURMa  
 
For example, MAPD was involved in the implementation of a Collaborative Quality Improvement (CQI) 
module in 2017 in ten high volume facilities.58 The module – originally piloted in Kayunga District in 
partnership with ASSIST – involved collaborative data reviews and problem analysis with health facility 
staff, identification of bottlenecks and solutions, implementation of remedial action, and further iterative 
monitoring, review and follow up.59 The data under review – and, thus, the outcomes the intervention 
sought to improve – were related specifically to malaria program indicators (e.g. accuracy and 
completeness of cases in the lab register and OPD, number of fever cases tested for malaria using 
mRDT or microscopy, number of malaria-negative cases treated with ACTs, number of malaria-positive 
cases treated with ACTs, number of pregnant women receiving three or more doses of IPTp). The CQI 
intervention led to a 108% increase in cases recorded in the OPD register from baseline, an 89% 
decrease in cases treated with ACTs in the absence of laboratory confirmation, and a 11% increase in 
number of expectant mothers >28 weeks pregnant that received three or more IPTp-SP doses.60  
 
Such initiatives, while successful in improving short-term health outcomes at target facilities, 
nevertheless frequently emphasize specific program indicators - e.g. those related to HIV/AIDS, 
immunization, malaria - in response to either a) changes in the national HMIS indicators or diagnostic 
 
56 AHSPR (2018). 
57 Tashobya et al (2015). 
58 Ngabarino T et al (2018). 
59 Karamagi et al (2017).  
60 Ibid.  
40 
 guidelines; b) research findings of poor quality indicators related to specific programs; and c) external 
program expectations.61,62   
 
What they do not necessarily do, however, is contribute to a consistent, standardized, country-wide 
pattern of annual, robust utilization  of a cross-section of multi-sectoral health information at district, 
facility and community level. Moreover, utilization is often wholly dependent on the personal initiative, 
interest, and commitment of individual Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), District Health Officers 
(DHOs), facility in-charges, and sub-county leadership, as well as external introduction, facilitation, and 
on-going interest by implementing partners introducing change packages.  
 
The larger issue is, then, whether either the MoH and/or local government have the political 
commitment to institutionalize and budget for regular data review initiatives  across all levels of the 
health system and implement incentive and disincentive structures to ensure participation. In the 
absence of these, activities like DQAs, supportive supervision, and CQI remain purely technical fixes to 
technical bottlenecks but the context of the bottlenecks – that is, the “whys” of poor data utilization – 
remains unchanged. 
Changing the Culture of Data Use 
The second category, then, refers to some of these less tangible bottlenecks:  those related to 
“ownership” of data and the culture of data use more broadly.63  This finding is not unique to Uganda.  
Systematic reviews of studies on the culture of HMIS data utilization have persistently shown that health 
care providers from countries as diverse as Columbia, India, Sri Lanka, South Africa, Tanzania, and 
Kenya often struggle to find the data that they are tasked with compiling on behalf of such national 
systems as important and frequently deprioritize tasks related to routine data collection.64 
 
In 2015-2016, PMI financed an anthropological study by IDRC and the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) as part of Kayunga’s roll out of the MRC CQI package. The study addressed  
barriers to utilization and why it is sometimes difficult for facility staff to feel ownership of HMIS data.65 
The study found that HMIS interventions were assessed by different stakeholders within two very 
different regimes of value. The first regime was the “ data value ” placed on the health information system 
by parties external to the health facility (implementing partners, district government, donors).  The 
second regime was based on “ care value ” which represented the value placed by health workers on 
prioritizing patient care and maintaining social relationships. The increase in the burden of reporting 
placed upon health workers by the expanded HMIS brought these value regimes into conflict with one 
another.66 
Following from this, a recent national malaria epidemiological profile produced jointly by the NMCD, 
WHO, and LSHTM identified “the need to build up a culture of data use” as an essential component to 
HMIS systems strengthening but offered few solutions beyond the promotion of “the use of all data 
 
61 For example, following the discovery in 2014 of poor quality Extended Program of Immunization (EPI) data in the 
DHIS2, FETP has carried out phased deployment of Data Improvement Teams (DITs) for DQA and training in 14 districts, 
including Kampala. AFENET. 2019. Uganda Immunization Data Improvement Teams (DIT). Kampala: CDC. 
http://199.231.187.134/images/2019/dox/Uganda-DIT_Summary_Document_05092019_Final_002.pdf  
62 Karamagi E et al (2017) 
63 Muhindo et al (2016); Kagoya & Kibuule (2018); Hutchinson et al (2018). 
64 Akhlaq et al (2016); Tull (2018). 
65 Hutchinson et al (2018). 
66 Ibid.  
41 
 from academic and routine health information sources for malaria stratifications” in order to compare 
“data sources to understand the balance between prevalence and incidence [and] allow for a better 
understanding of how to adjust control strategies.”67  Authors recommend providing NMCD and 
partners “regular opportunities to interrogate DHIS 2 data, modelled data and survey data together.”68  
Likewise, partners such as Global Fund, WHO, and the CDC routinely provide both financing and 
opportunities for data analysis, as well as support seconded or externally-funded staff, for example, via 
the CDC’s Field Epidemiological Training Program (FETP). FETP has trained cadre of field 
epidemiologists towards sustainable local capacity in epidemiological surveillance and data analysis.69 This 
activity has helped produce a professional class of technical experts who are well versed in the benefits 
data utilization and have the capacity to interrogate data at the central level and for partners, as well as 
provide downstream support and training. This support is critical to enabling the NMCD to plan a 
national malaria response a nd certainly should continue; however, it also could be reasonably argued 
that the NMCD - as a siloed disease control program - already has a well-established culture of data use. 
Its main bottlenecks to utilization are staff capacity and resources to convene and utilize data toward 
planning.70 The support provided to ensure this happens is presently necessary, but also raise questions 
with respect to sustainability and the lack of advocacy for domestic financing for these activities. 
More critically, data review workshops, collaborative learning activities, and professional cadres of data 
analysts, represent purely “technical” solutions to what are essentially cultural problems . A gap remains 
between a high level, narrow professional respect for data, and a broad culture of data extending down 
to the lowest levels of the health system. If the issue is, indeed, cultural, then the gap between data value 
and care value will not be so easily bridged with technical inputs because health workers learn the 
culture of care as students at medical training facilities . The value of data, by contrast, is not taught until 
long after they enter into professional service and is rarely if ever explicitly linked to a clear, articulated 
vision of how data collection will help a nurse or midwife care for his or her patients.  
This finding suggests that technical interventions are not the only solution to poor “data ownership”, 
and that there is a need to redirect investment toward developing a culture of data use at the point 
where the culture of health work is created e.g. at medical, nursing and midwifery schools. USG has 
supported pre-service training in the past via the MEPI initiative, but the transformation of data value 
into care value has not been part of the supported curricula reform.71 
Reporting Burden 
 
“If you trained someone who is overwhelmed, and you want them to improve, they will not improve. They say ‘You are not 
as busy as I am and you come when you come then I can’t do my work.” (Data Analyst, NMCD) 
 
At the heart of problems with reporting and utilization is the overwhelming reporting burden created by 
an electronic-paper hybrid system . This burden is described at length in the introductory section of this 
report describing Uganda’s national HMIS, and was noted in every interview conducted for this analysis.  
 
67 National Malaria Control Division, KEMRI-Wellcome Research Trust and LSHTM. 2018. Uganda: A Profile of Malaria 
Control and Epidemiology. Kampala: Ministry of Health. https://web-
archive.lshtm.ac.uk/www.linkmalaria.org/sites/link/files/content/country/profiles/Malaria%20LINK%20profile%20Uganda-
final-4-9.pdf . Accessed 29 October 2019. 
68 Ibid. 
69 Ario et al (2019). 
70 National Malaria Control Division et al (2018). 
71 Omaswa et al (2018).  
42 
 In a study of barriers to integrating specifically family planning data into the DHIS2 and HMIS, 
researchers found that almost all barriers were related to the data ecosystem in Uganda including: 
 Complex forms 
 Double and terefore tedious entry of data 
 Limited human resources 
 High levels of staff attrition 
 Frequent stock out of paper-based forms72  
Indeed, almost every article on Uganda’s HMIS notes the issue with overwhelming data burden on health 
facility staff at all levels of the health system.73 The acknowledgement if this problem is one of the 
primary factors in Uganda’s long term commitment to eventual digitalization, irrespective of the barriers 
to implementation of such a system. 
 
As long as data has to be entered into paper forms and tallied by hand before entering a digitalized 
system, data quality will always be an issue, data validation and cleaning will always take a 
disproportionate amount of time, and data will always be late entering the system. Moreover, as long as 
quality of data remains questionable and as long as health workers feel overburdened in the collection 
and reporting of information for which they do not see the immediate purpose with respect to the care 
of patients, utilization will remain sub-optimal. 
 
MRCs recognized the issue with the reporting burden and moved to discontinue the “tally step”  in the 
process of data entry.  MRC data clerks have a reporting application that allow them to easily take paper 
registers and enter data daily. The tool then automatically tallies information, so that clerks then can 
simply enter the precalculated tallies into the digitalized system. As of now, however, this tool is in 
support of research by IDRC rather than routine data collection for the central and local government. 
 
Additionally, while such an application removes certain barriers from the upstream movement of data it 
does not yet address downstream movement of information. For facilities to utilize data, health workers 
at lower levels of the health system are taught to generate graphs that can be pinned up and reports 
that can be brought to planning meetings. They are not, however, taught what this data means for their 
day-to-day work. Moreover, they have to think about which and how such data should be analyzed (e.g. 
which variables are important, which pivots to use). Health worker “thinking” then is entirely taken up 
by the process of entering data and generating the report, not by the analysis of that report as it might 
apply to decision making . 
 
Summary: 
 Districts and regions with greater proportions of HC IIs have considerably more significant 
issues with data c ompleteness and weekly data timeliness than those that do not. 
 Districts with high malaria burden are sometimes not the districts performing poorly  as assessed 
by DLTs and measures such as data completeness and timeliness. 
 While everyone agrees data utilization is weak, nobody is measuring utilization in a meaningful 
way and then only in the context of their own MEL activities or by proxy. 
 
72 Wandera SO et al (2019). 
73 Kiberu VM et al (2014); Muhindo et al (2106); Huang et al (2017); Kagoya HR, Kibuule D (2018).  
43 
  There are numerous issues with data utilization that are primarily technical, not the least of 
which is that different regional partners do not necessarily carry out their strengthening 
activities in a uniform way.  
 PFP sector contribution to the HMIS is only minimal. Most recommended means by which to 
engage private sector in reporting have already been tried in Uganda with limited success. 
 At the heart of utilization bottlenecks is the lack of a culture of data use . 
 This bottleneck is created long before health workers enter the health service  and will not be 
solved by technical fixes  
 All bottlenecks, from data quality to utilization, are fueled by the paper-based reporting burden . 
 
*** 
 
Analysis Question 3:  Gaps in Systems Strengthening 
 
What are the gaps in supporting HMIS strengthening in Uganda and which of these gaps would make 
most sense for PMI to fill through existing mechanisms?  
 
Based on the analysis presented above, the following gaps and recommendations have been identified: 
 
GAP 1:  Focus of PMI sub-national HMIS investment may be targeted too high. 
 
Rationale: 
1. Weekly reporting is worse further down the health system both with respect to timeliness and 
completeness. 
2. Other implementing partners and financing initiatives (e.g. PEPFAR) already support HMIS at HC 
III, HC IV, general/district hospital and RRH-levels, as well as iCCM. 
3. HC IIs represent a massive proportion of public-sector facilities in many regions (up to 80% in 
some). 
4. HC IIs are the lowest level of PHC and sit at an interface between communities and facilities 
further up along the line of referral. 
5. HC II staff often oversee VHTs.  
6. In many instances, it is at HC II level where malaria is caught, i.e. HC IIs do not have labs 
attached to them but likely will have mRDTs. 
7. Little to no support flows to HC IIs unless – in very rare cases - their patient volume is high 
enough/catchment area large enough to have them serve as HIV hubs or have maternity wards. 
 
Solution:   Redirect HMIS investment lower down the health system, i.e. to HC IIs.  
 
Additionally: 
 Finance research to better understand HC IIs contribution to malaria control and to the health 
system more generally, and what gaps exist in capacity specific to HC IIs. 
 Advocate to other initiatives and partners to ensure that their regional IPs prioritize HMIS 
systems strengthening in their support to HC IIIs, HC IVs, and hospitals, not just HIV systems 
strengthening. 
 Begin conversations with MoH as to what HMIS support might be required should HC IIs 
eventually transition to different catchment area and human resources criteria.  
44 
 *** 
GAP 2: Focus of PMI sub-national HMIS investment may be targeting too many districts, 
and not the ones that need it most. 
 
Rationale:  
1. Some of the districts with the highest malaria burden are also – if DLTs can be trusted -- 
performing reasonably well with respect to health service delivery more generally, and data 
collection and utilization specifically (i.e. the issue of malaria burden may – sometimes – have to 
do with contextual factors and not poor quality data and sub-optimal utilization). 
2. Regional implementing partners are often tasked with either implementing HMIS strengthening 
activities everywhere or responding to facilities with particular problems.  
3. There are other ways of planning investment, though, and investing in HMIS systems where 
districts already perform well with respect to data systems may not bring value for money. 
4. When it comes to PMI HMIS investment, better targeting may make it possible to direct 
financing toward a critical constellation of factors (e.g. high malaria incidence + poor 
performance with respect to data + poor overall performance). 
5. New districts have new DHMTs, and so an opportunity exists to start with a clean slate in those 
districts that have been carved off of poorly performing existing districts. 
 
Solution:  With respect to HMIS, ensure implementing partners prioritize not just high burden malaria 
districts or districts with a surge, but districts with simultaneously weak systems, esp. new districts.  
 
Additionally: 
 Investment in research to understand the extent to which data problems help to drive malaria 
burden. 
 Begin looking at creative ways to analyze not just systems data specific to malaria in relation to 
malaria burden, but systems data/performance data more generally in relation to malaria. 
*** 
GAP 3:  iCCM is an important target for support, but many other partners are already 
investing in it, alongside data systems for VHTs; however linkages to a) lower level facilities 
and to b) sub-district government systems remain undeveloped. 
 
Rationale: 
1. PMI and other partners already support iCCM, with partners such as UNICEF,  DfID SURMa, 
and TASO focusing on iCCM and VHT data systems. 
2. UNICEF has received Rockefeller funding to fully digitalize VHTs, with information being sent 
directly from VHT to DHIS2 (even though this will only be in select districts at first). 
3. Facilities, however, will still need to review VHT data for planning and the danger of full 
digitalization is that information from communities will by bypass facilities altogether. 
4. Additionally, long-term plans by MoH for HCIIs in Uganda are to eventually transition them to 
manned by CHEWs, thus potentially disconnecting the information chain from community to 
facility even further. 
5. A precedent already exists in CDC support for VHT/facility information bridge in the context of 
HIV. 
  
45 
 Solution:  Invest in developing two-way iCCM – facility information “bridge” mechanisms, especially with 
respect to the bridge between communities/VHTs and HC IIs.  
 
Additionally: 
 UNICEF project is likely only in five districts at first so, depending on what happens, 
opportunities may exist to leverage Rockefeller/UNICEF lessons/platforms and potentially 
support scale up of VHT digitalization.  
 Financing may be required for improved data utilization platforms for parish and sub-county 
government and ensure downstream feedback loops work with respect to data. 
*** 
GAP 4:  Problems with utilization are anecdotal, and utilization is not routinely measured 
within existing systems and largely assessed by proxy. 
 
Rationale:  
1. Utilization is only really measured within implementing partners’ own project MEL plans, and 
then only within districts within projects’ coverage area. 
2. In spite of their issues, DLTs are the only routine, standardized, fully institutiontalized way that 
exists right now to really infer data use at scale. 
3. Data review is one of the main “systems strengthening” activities that most partners engage in 
but is unsustainable without external financial support and routine review is not institutionalized 
via dedicated budgets at central or district level. 
4. Beginning to wean local government off donor funding for data review begins with empowering 
and incentivizing district and facility leaders who utilize data. 
5. This requires better indicators than performance rankings and league tables. 
6. It also requires performance to be more easily measured  below district, hospital and HC IV level, 
and in a standardized way that has been fully adopted by government (i.e. as evidenced within 
the AHSPR, etc.). 
 
Solution:  Help support performance measures by working with government and other partners to 
create clear, actionable indicators for data utilization and performance ranking embedded in the health 
system, not simply partner MEL activities.  
 
Additionally: 
 Ensure all partners receiving PMI financing are measuring utilization using a common set of 
process indicators agreed upon by MoH. 
 Fund research to lay the foundation for advocacy to include “utilization” as a measurable 
component within the HMIS. 
*** 
GAP 5:  There is little ownership of data at facility or community level 
 
Rationale:  
1. Health workers are trained for clinical care, not “data care” and cannot see link or usefulness of 
data in their daily work.  
46 
 2. Data needs of government and partners represent an overwhelming paperwork burden on 
facility workers, and many facilities do not have data clerks to support facility in-charges in 
managing data. 
3. Even where data clerks exist, the information going into the system is dependent on paper-
based recording by health workers for whom reporting will always be less of a priority than 
treating patients.  
4. Technical “fixes” such as DQA and data review might improve the process of compiling and 
reporting data, but do not address the overall perception of lack of usefulness. 
5. While data utilization has been part of health management training courses for senior health 
managers (funded by USAID/Intrahealth, UNITAID/CHAI, DfID and others) as well as 
supplementary public health courses for licensed medical professionals (CDC), it is not part of 
routine medical training for health workers. 
6. USG has financed medical education in Uganda in the past via a $2 million investment from the 
PEPFAR-financed MEPI initiative so a precedent exists.  
Solution:  Work with partners to develop and implement pre-service training modules for medical 
training institutions that focus on the role that data play in clinical care and facility management to 
develop a culture of data use prior to newly accredited health workers assuming their posts.  
 
Additionally: 
 Leverage existing medical education initiatives. 
 Ensure upstream advocacy to government – parliament, medical training institutions – to ensure 
additions to curriculum are permanent and sustainable. 
*** 
GAP 6:  PMI-financed partner training activities are often only malaria surveillance 
focused, not systems focused, and partners are largely free to decide how these should 
take place 
 
Rationale:  
1. Both PMI global strategy and the NMCD mandate that investment in HMIS is an investment in 
systems strengthening more broadly, not just “malaria surveillance systems.” 
2. PMI MOPs budget lines have repeatedly financed “training” for facilities and districts for the last 
five years across multiple implementing partners, however, this training is largely focused on 
malaria indicators, not remedying overall systemic bottlenecks. 
3. Training is often being done ad hoc by implementing partners, e.g. when DHIS2 adds indicators 
for which training is needed, different regional partners have had to carry out this training 
largely using self-developed modules. 
4. Different financing initiatives (PEFPAR, GAVI, Global Fund) meant that many other MoH health 
implementing partners carry out ”training” activities with respect to HMIS/DHIS2, but the effort 
is frequently siloed according to health issue and efforts could, potentially, be time- and cost-
shared. 
5. While MoH has HMIS training manuals, they don’t necessarily have standardized packages 
related to strengthening.  
 
Solution:  Invest in standardized curricula development for HMIS strengthening activities by all partners, 
with focus specifically on such curricula emerging directly from the central Department of Health 
Information (DHI), not programs.   
47 
  
Additionally: 
 Work with DHI toward institutionalization and ownership of HMIS strengthening curricula by 
government. 
 Focus the curricula not just on generating the programmatic data required for malaria 
surveillance, but rather on achieving “usefulness” of data for the day-to-day work of health 
workers and district managers. 
 Extend training to private sector providers. 
 
GAP 7.  Up to 60% of malaria cases are being treated in the for-profit private sector (PFP) 
which does not participate in the DHIS2 or HMIS 
 
Rationale: 
1. No amount of investment can hold PFP accountable. 
2. Incentive/disincentive structures have to be built and this is the role of Uganda national 
regulatory bodies. 
3. Compliance has to be built in at the level of licensing/accreditation 
 
Solution:  Cross-agency/-initiative advocacy mechanism to support upstream advocacy toward 
regulatory and policy change.  
 
Additionally: 
 Work with PFP professional bodies to develop positive incentive structures  
 Such an advocacy mechanism can support USG partners working with MoH to support 
embeddedness and utilization of other platforms and mechanisms that have an evidence-base for 
effectiveness (e.g. as above, indicators for utilization, tools for data reporting, changes to 
MoH/medical education curricula)  
 
GAP 8.  The overwhelming reporting burden drives both data access bottlenecks and data 
utilization bottlenecks  
 
Rationale:  
1. With respect to data, the thinking at facility level goes primarily into the act of meeting 
reporting obligations, not into any sort of analysis of “what does this information do for us”?  
2. There are multiple points in the process of data moving from the health worker to the DHIS2 
where quality, completeness, timeliness and utilization of data run into barriers. Two of the 
most notable are a) the process of filling tally sheets and b) the act of generating useful reports. 
3. MRCs already have a partial version of such tools – e.g. an Excel sheet to remove tallying – so 
learnings here can be leveraged for something better.  
4. Predetermined pivots, for example, can be built into a reporting tool to take the thinking out of 
report generation and allow every health worker the chance to analyze data. 
 
Solution:  Partner with DHI and existing MEL IPs for solutions towards an automatic reporting and 
report generation tool/apps.  
 
Additionally: 
 Ensure such tools are a) interoperable and b) can be adopted under domestic financing.  
 Ensure tools are not malaria-specific but have relevance across facilities, and are purpose built to 
the needs of different levels of the health system.   
48 
 *** 
Conclusion 
 
This landscape analysis addressed PMI strategic financing in Uganda’s national HMIS from the perspective 
of: 
1. Existing investment by other partners 
2. Critical gaps in existing investment 
3. Areas of systems strengthening through which malaria programming would necessarily benefit 
 
The analysis sought to create a set of evidence- and logic-based recommendations for strategic 
investment in the national HMIS, taking into account PMI Uganda’s dual purpose of both supporting the 
NMCD in generating sound malaria surveillance data toward malaria control and eventual elimination, 
and engaging in HMIS systems strengthening more broadly as mandated by the PMI Global Strategy. 
 
Underlying these recommendations are a general set of cross cutting principles that emerged across 
almost all discussions with stakeholders and are foundational elements within the Uganda National e-
Health Policy (Figure 16). These principles address the main systems barriers standing in the way of a 
robust national HMIS:  
 
4. A paper-based system and its contribution to the reporting burden 
5. Segmentation and its contribution to a siloed and uncoordinated HMIS strengthening response 
6. Lack of ownership and its contribution to a sub-optimal environment for data utilization  
Figure 16:  Bottlenecks, Principles, and Strategic Questions 
The medium- to long-term strategies to address These systems barriers must involve the commitment 
to digitalization, integration, and a culture of data.   
Therefore, prior to any strategic investment in the national HMIS, the larger questions that should be 
asked are:  
 
49 
  
4. Will this initiative facilitate or be adaptable to a fully electronic HMIS? 
5. Will this initiative support integration of systems? 
6. Will this initiative bring value to end users at all levels of the health system? 
The answer to all of these questions should, ideally, be “yes”. 
   
50 
 Annex A:  Bibliography 
Achan J, Wanzira H, Mpimbaza A, Tumwine D, Namasopo H, Nambuya H, Seranga  A, Nantanda R. 
2019.: Improving the Quality of Neonatal Data Capture and Clinical Care at  Tertiary Hospital in 
Uganda Through Enhanced Surveillance, Training and Mentorship. Paediatrics and International 
Child Health.  doi:10.1080/20469047.2019.1638131 
ACTWatch Group, Kaula H, Buyungo P, Opigo J. 2017. Private Sector Role, Readiness and Performance 
for Malaria Case Management in Uganda, 2015. Malaria Journal . 16(219). doi:10.1186/s12936-017-
1824-x 
ACTwatch Group. 2016. Malaria Market Trends in Sub-Saharan Africa: 2009–2014. Washington, DC: 
PSI. 
AFENET. 2019. Uganda Immunization Data Improvement Teams (DIT). Kampala: CDC. 
http://199.231.187.134/images/2019/dox/Uganda-
DIT_Summary_Document_05092019_Final_002.pdf 
Akhlaq A, McKinstry B, bin Mohammed K, Sheikh A. 2016. Barriers and Facilitators to Health 
Information Exchange in Low- and Middle-Income Settings:  A Systematic Review. Health Policy 
and Planning . 31:1310–1325 doi: 10.1093/heapol/czw056  
Ario RA, Bulage L, Kadobera D, Kwesiga B, Kabwama SN, Tusiime P, Wanyenze RK. 2019. Uganda 
Public Health Fellowship Program’s Contribution to Building a Sustainable Public Health System 
in Uganda. Global Health Action. 12(1): 1609825. 
Ashton RA, Bennett A, Yukich J, Bhattarai A, Keating J, Eisele T. 2017. Methodological Considerations 
for Use of Routine Health Information System Data to Evaluate Malaria Program Impact in an 
Era of Declining Malaria Transmission.  American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene . 
97(Suppl 3): 46-57. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.16-0734. 
Awor P, Wamani H, Bwire G, Jagoe G, Peterson S. 2012. Private Sector Drug Shops in Integrated 
Community Case Management of Malaria, Pneumonia, and Diarrhea in Children in Uganda. 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 87(5 Suppl):92–6. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-
0791 
Bennett A, Avancena ALV, Wegbreit J, Cotter C, Roberts K, Gosling R. 2017. Engaging the Private 
Sector in Malaria Surveillance: A Review of Strategies and Recommendations for Elimination 
Settings. Malaria Journal . 16:252. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1901-1 
Bergum BI. 2017. Architectural Patterns in the Medical Commodity Supply Chains in Developing 
Countries A Collective Case Study of Uganda and Tanzania. Master’s Thesis. Oslo: University of 
Oslo Department of Informatics. 
Berntsen SN. 2015. Enabling Participatory Design in Low Resource Contexts:  A Study of Distributed 
Software Development of DHIS2. Master’s Thesis. Oslo: University of Oslo Department of 
Informatics. 
BTC Uganda. 2017. BTC Health Newsletter. Issue 1. March 20, 2017. Issue 
file:///Users/bethpratt/Downloads/BTC_MoH%20HealthNewsletter.March%202017.pdf  
Cohen JL, Yavuz E, Morris A, Arkedis J, Sabot O. 2012. Do Patients Adhere to Over-the-Counter 
Artemisinin Combination Therapy for Malaria? Evidence from an Intervention Study in Uganda. 
Malaria Journal . 11(83). doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-83 
Dehnavieh R, Haghsdoost A, Khosravi A, Hoseinabadi F, Rahimi H, Poursheikhali A, et al. 2018. The 
District Health Information System (DHIS2): A Literature Review and Meta-Synthesis of its 
Strengths and Operational Challenges Based on the Experiences of 11 Countries. Health 
Information Management Journal . 1-14.  doi: 10.1177/1833358318777713.  
51 
 Delegation of the European Union to Uganda. 2015. Supporting Policy Engagements For Evidence-based 
Decisions (SPEED) for Universal Health Coverage in Uganda. 
https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/uganda/51649/supporting-policy-engagements-evidence-based-
decisions-speed-universal-health-coverage-uganda_en . Retrieved 6 October 2019. 
DfID. 2016. Business Case: Strengthening Uganda’s Response to Malaria (SURMA). DfID: Kampala. 
https://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/projects/GB-GOV-1-300249/documents. Retrieved October 1, 
2019. 
DfID. 2017. Business Case: Karamoja Nutrition Program. DfID: Kampala. 
https://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/projects/GB-1-205165/documents. Retrieved October 1, 2019. 
Delegation of the European Union to Uganda. 2015. Supporting Policy Engagements For Evidence-based 
Decisions (SPEED) for Universal Health Coverage in Uganda. 
https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/uganda/51649/supporting-policy-engagements-evidence-based-
decisions-speed-universal-health-coverage-uganda_en. Retrieved 6 October 2019. 
Gates Foundation. 2019. Grantmaking: Awarded Grants - Uganda. Website. 
https://www.gatesfoundation.org/how-we-work/quick-links/grants-
database#q/k=Uganda&region=Sub-Saharan%20Africa&program=Global%20Health Retrieved 
October 30, 2019. 
GAVI. 2015. Application Form: Health System Strengthening (HSS) Support in 2016. October 15, 2015. 
https://www.gavi.org/country/uganda/documents/. Retrieved October 1, 2019. 
Global Fund. 2014a. Supporting Uganda’s Response to the HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis Reduction 
Strategy. Framework Agreement between The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and 
Malaria and The AIDS Support Organization (Uganda) Limited. October 28, 2014. 
https://www.theglobalfund.org/en/portfolio/country/grant/?k=78169a91-8bc0-4e2e-a674-
2c872e179903&grant=UGA-C-TASO.  Retrieved October 1, 2019 
Global Fund. 2014b. Supporting Uganda’s Strategy for Acceleration Towards Elimination of Malaria. 
Framework Agreement between The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and 
The Republic of Uganda. https://www.theglobalfund.org/en/portfolio/country/grant/?k=8ccf2a7c-
137c-47b2-af9a-3af8a01ac525&grant=UGA-M-MoFPED. October 28, 2014. 
Global Fund. 2014c. Supporting Uganda’s Response to HIV/AIDS. Framework Agreement between The 
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and The Republic of Uganda. October 28, 
2014. https://www.theglobalfund.org/en/portfolio/country/grant/?k=9e135789-2d70-4aad-9f66-
98f329980552&grant=UGA-H-MoFPED. Retrieved October 1, 2019 
Global Fund. 2014d. Supporting Uganda’s Malaria Reduction Strategy. Framework Agreement between 
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and The Republic of Uganda. October 
28, 2014. https://www.theglobalfund.org/en/portfolio/country/grant/?k=fdbb7772-4b55-4434-
a81b-09354af891ce&grant=UGA-M-TASO.  Retrieved October 1, 2019 
Global Fund. 2014e. Supporting Uganda’s Tuberculosis Reduction Strategy. Framework Agreement 
between The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and The Republic of Uganda. 
October 28, 2014. https://www.theglobalfund.org/en/portfolio/country/grant/?k=38d81dda-fe30-
44fd-9c05-ed5ec3dadd5f&grant=UGA-T-MoFPED. Retrieved October 1, 2019 
Healey J, Conlon CM, Malama K, Hobson R, Kaharuza F, Kekitiinwa A, et al. 2019. Sustainability and 
Scale of the Saving Mothers, Giving Life Approach in Uganda and Zambia. Global Health Science 
and Practice.  7 (Suppl. 1): S188-S206. 
Huang F, Blashke S, Lucas H. 2017. Beyond Pilotitis: Taking Digital Health Interventions to the National 
Level in China and Uganda. Globalization and Health.  13:49. Doi:10.1186/s12992-017-0275-z.  
52 
 Hutchinson E, Nayiga S, Nabirye C, Taaka L, Staedke SG. 2018. Data value and care value in the practice 
of health systems: A case study in Uganda.  Social Science & Medicine . 211:123-130. 
doi:10.1016/jsocscimed.2018.05.039. 
Kagoya HR, Kibuule D. 2018. Quality Assurance of Health Management Information Systems. African 
Evaluation Journal . 6(2). doi: 10.4102/aej.v6i2.238. 
Karamagi E, Muhire M, Kisamba H, Rahimzai M, Boguslavsky V, Broughton E, et al. 2017. Improvement 
Change Package: Changes to Improve Quality of Data for Management of Malaria in Kayunga 
District in Uganda. January 2017. Kampala: USAID ASSIST Project. 
Kiberu VM, Matovu JK, Makumbi F, Kyozira C, Mukooyo E, Wanyenze RK. 2014. Strengthening District-
Based Health Reporting through the District Health Management Information Software System: 
The Ugandan Experience. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 14: 40. 
Kibombo R, Owarwo V, Nuamanya A, Jessani N, Otikal K. 2016. Evaluation of Uganda Strengthening 
Decentralization for Sustainability Program. Kampala: USAID Uganda. 
Kumar M, Gotz D, Nutley T, Smith J. 2017. Research gaps in routine health information system design 
barriers to quality and use in low- and middle-income countries: A literature review. International 
Journal of Health Planning and Management. 1-9. doi:10.1002/hpm.2447. 
Lam F, Kirchhoffer D, Buluma DM, Kabunga L, Wamala-Mucheri PN, Schroder K, Battu A. 2019. A 
Retrospective Mixed-Methods Evaluation of a National ORS and Zinc Scale-Up Program in 
Uganda between 2011-2016. Journal of Global Health . 9(1):010504. 
Malaria & Childhood Illness Network. 2017. Sustaining Malaria Investment Gains in Uganda & Prospects of 
Citizens’ Involvement . Nairobi:  KeNAAM. 
Measure Evaluation. 2018. Building a Strong and Interoperable Digital Health Information System for 
Uganda. October 2018. Chapel Hill: Measure Evaluation.   
Ministry of Health. 2014. The Uganda Malaria Reduction Strategic Plan 2014-2020. Kampala: Ministry of 
Health. 
Ministry of Health. 2017. Uganda National eHealth Strategy 2017 - 2021. Kampala: Ministry of Health. 
http://health.go.ug/sites/default/files/National%20e_Health%20Strategy_0.pdf . Retrieved October 
5, 2019. 
Ministry of Health. 2018a.  National Malaria Control Division Annual Report July 2017 - June 2018. 
Kampala: Ministry of Health. 
Ministry of Health. 2018b. Annual Health Sector Performance Report 2017/18. Kampala: Ministry of 
Health. 
Ministry of Health. 2018c. Malaria Quarterly Bulletin: October 2018-December 2018. Kampala: Minsitry 
of Health. 
Ministry of Health. 2019a. Malaria Quarterly Bulletin: October 2018-December 2018. Kampala: Minsitry 
of Health. 
Ministry of Health. 2019b.  
Muhindo R, Joloba EN, Nakajako D. 2016. Health Management Information System (HMIS): Whose data 
is it anyway? Contextual challenges. Review of Public Administration and Management . 4:2. 
doi:10.4172/2315-7844. 
 National Malaria Control Division, KEMRI-Wellcome Research Trust, LSHTM. 2018. Uganda: A Profile 
of Malaria Control and Epidemiology. Kampala: Ministry of Health. https://web-
archive.lshtm.ac.uk/www.linkmalaria.org/sites/link/files/content/country/profiles/Malaria%20LINK
%20profile%20Uganda-final-4-9.pdf . Accessed 29 October 2019. 
Ngabarino T, Tumukurate E, Atukunda I, Katarikawe E, Opigo J, Muhire M, Goodwin E, Gudoi S, Belay 
K, Thomas P, Tibenderana J. 2018. Using the Collaborative Quality Improvement Approach to 
Increase Adherence to the Test, Treat, and Track Malaria Case Management Framework: Experiences  
53 
 from 10 Health Facilities in Uganda.  Poster presented at the Conference for the American Society 
for Tropical Health and Medicine, 28th October – 1st November 2018. 
Omaswa F, Kiguli-Malwadde E, Donkor P, Hakim J, Derbew M, Baird, S et al. 2018. The Medical 
Education Partnership Initiative (MEPI): Innovations and Lessons for Health Professions Training 
and Research in Africa. Annals of Global Health. 84(1):160–169. doi:10.29024/aogh.8. 
PEPFAR. 2017. PEPFAR Uganda Country Operational Plan (COP) 2017 Strategic Direction Summary. 
March 16, 2017. Kampala: PEPFAR Uganda 
PEPFAR. 2018. PEPFAR Uganda Country Operational Plan (COP) 2018 Strategic Direction Summary. 
Kampala: PEPFAR Uganda 
PEPFAR. 2019. PEPFAR Uganda Country Operational Plan (COP) 2019 Strategic Direction Summary. 
April 12, 2019 Kampala: PEPFAR Uganda. 
Sakar M, Muhangi KR. 2013.  Project Report:  Improving Inpatient and Outpatient HMIS Data Reporting within 
Health Units in Rakai District.  Medium-term Fellowship Program at Makerere University School of 
Public Health. Kampala: MUSPH       
SIAPS. 2014. Considerations for the Integration of HMIS and LMIS. Arlington, VA: Management Sciences 
for Health 
Sujatmiko NF. 2015. Implementing DHIS2 Feedback via Short Message Service:  A Case Study for 
Uganda WEMR Health Workers. Master Thesis. Oslo:  University of Oslo  Department of 
Informatics. https://www.duo.uio.no/bitstream/handle/10852/47635/1/NugrohoSujatmiko—
Master.pdf 
Tashobya CK, Dubourg D, Ssengooba F, Speybroeck N, Macq J, Criel B. 2016a. A Comparison of 
Hierarchical Cluster Analysis and League Table Rankings as Methods for Analysis and 
Presentation of District Health System Performance Data in Uganda. Health Policy and Planning . 
31(2): 217–228. doi:10.1093/heapol/czv045. 
Tashobya CK, Criel B, Marchal B, Macq J, Campos da Silveira V. Byakika S, Ssengooba F. 2016b. The 
Waxing and Waning of the Uganda District League Table: Using Historical and Policy Analysis to 
Study Implementation of a Health System Performance Assessment Framework. Studies in Health 
Services Organization & Policy. 32: 1-109.  
Tull K. 2018. Designing and Implementing Health Management Information Systems. K4D Help Desk 
Report. London: DfID. 
Uganda Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro. 2010. Uganda Malaria Indicator Survey 2009. Calverton, 
Maryland, USA: UBOS and ICF Macro. 
Uganda Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro. 2015. Uganda Malaria Indicator Survey 2014-15. Calverton, 
Maryland, USA: UBOS and ICF Macro. 
 Uganda Bureau of Statistics and ICF Macro. 2019. Key Indicators. Uganda Malaria Indicator Survey 
2018-19. Calverton, Maryland, USA: UBOS and ICF Macro. 
Umezuruike C, Nwankwo W, Kareyo M. 2017. Implementation Challenges of Health Management 
Information Systems in Uganda: A Review. Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and 
Technology . 4(7): 7726-7731.  
UNICEF. 2016. Uganda Country Office Annual Report 2016: Uganda. UNICEF: Kampala 
https://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Uganda_2016_COAR.pdf. Retrieved October 2, 
2019. 
UNICEF. 2017a. Uganda:  Promoting Bottleneck Analysis for Action and Accountability on Maternal and 
Child Health. ESAR Programme Monitoring and Response Initiative. Kampala: UNICEF 
UNICEF. 2017b. Uganda Country Office Annual Report 2017: Uganda. UNICEF: Kampala. 
https://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Uganda_2017_COAR.pdf. Retrieved October 2, 
2019. 
UNICEF. 2017c.  mTrac: Using Innovations to Improve Healthcare. Website. 
https://www.unicef.org/uganda/what-we-do/mtrac. Accessed 22 October 2019.  
54 
 UNICEF. 2018. Uganda Country Office Annual Report 2018. UNICEF: Kampala. 
https://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Uganda_2018_COAR.pdf.  Retrieved October 
2, 2019. 
USAID Uganda. 2016. Uganda Country Development Cooperation Strategy: 2016-2021. Kampala: 
USAID. 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2015. President’s Malaria Initiative Strategy 2015-2020. Washington, 
DC: PMI. 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2016. President’s Malaria Initiative Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan 
FY 2017. Kampala: PMI. 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2017.  President’s Malaria Initiative Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan 
FY 2018. Kampala: PMI. 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2018. President’s Malaria Initiative Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan 
FY 2019.  Kampala: PMI 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2019a. President’s Malaria Initiative Technical Guidance FY 2020.  
Washington, DC: PMI. 
U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative. 2019b. Assessment of iCCM reporting. Powerpoint Presentation. 
Kampala: PMI Uganda. 
Village Reach. 2017. HMIS-LMIS Integration Generalized Use Cases based on Assessments in Three 
Countries. January 25, 2017. Seattle: Village Reach. 
Wandera SO, Kwagala B, Nankinga O, Ndugga P, Kabagenyi A, Adamou B, Kachero B. 2019. Facilitators, 
Best Practices and Barriers to Integrating Family Planning Data in Uganda’s Health Management 
Information System. BMC Health Services Research.  19(327). doi:10.1186/s12913-019-4151-9 
Wanzala M, Oloo MO. 2019. A review of health financing and information systems: the role of devolved 
governance. Saudi Journal of Nursing and Health Care.  doi:10.21276/sjnhc.2019.2.7.3. 
World Bank. 2016. Project Appraisal Document:  Uganda Reproductive, Maternal, and Child Health 
Services Improvement Project. July 14, 2016. Kampala: World Bank.  
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/854971471534008736/pdf/PAD-07182016.pdf  
Willey BA, Tougher S, Ye Y, Mann AG, Thomson R, Kourgueni IA, et al. 2007. Communicating the 
AMFm Message: Exploring the Effect of Communication and Training Interventions on Private 
for-Profit Provider Awareness and Knowledge Related to a Multi-Country Anti-Malarial Subsidy 
Intervention. Malaria Journal . 13:46. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-13-46 
World Health Organization. 2016.  Global Technical Strategy for Malaria, 2016-2030. Geneva: World 
Health Organization. 
55 
 Annex B.  Scope of the Landscape Analysis 
Purpose of the Analysis 
PMI would like a landscape analysis to determine gaps in HMIS strengthening support in Uganda, in 
order to help guide PMI’s investment in surveillance, monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Currently, PMI’s number one priority is the use of data to better allocate resources and continually 
improve impact. Thus, PMI wishes to optimize its contribution to HMIS strengthening in Uganda by 
investing available resources in interventions not currently supported by other donors, especially those 
with the highest impact on routine health data timeliness, quality and use. Opportunities for building on 
existing investments and initiatives for a synergistic impact would also be of great interest. 
 
PMI is particularly interested in addressing the challenges surrounding data collection and use at the data 
entry level in both health facilities and the community. For instance, health providers are still not fully 
understanding the value of health information relative to health care.  This is illustrated by some facilities 
designating non-health personnel to manage data records while health workers focus on patient care. 
HMIS strengthening approaches need to institutionalize the culture of health workers owning and using 
health information, as well as recognizing the importance of health information reporting and use in 
their daily work.  
 
Consistent understanding on data input procedures is also lacking: previous analyses have identified gaps 
in health worker understanding on how to complete and report some indicators, highlighting a need for 
standardization of supporting guidelines. Systematic challenges also exist around provision of reporting 
tools and equipment. 
Key Questions  
In order to determine the most effective investments for strengthening Uganda’s national HMIS/DHIS-2, 
PMI is interested in answers to the following key questions: 
 
a. What are the key inputs and processes that, if strengthened, would lead to more timely 
reporting of malaria data, as well as optimal completeness, quality, and use at the health facility 
and community levels?74 
 
b. Which of these key inputs and processes are already supported by donors? In which 
geographical areas? Since HMIS strengthening is not a disease-specific intervention, this mapping 
should include investments from a broad list of donors (e.g. PEPFAR, other USAID and CDC 
programs, Department of Defense, DFID, Global Fund, GAVI, etc.). 
 
c. What are the gaps in supporting HMIS strengthening in Uganda and which of these gaps would 
make most sense for PMI to fill through existing mechanisms? 
 
The operationalization and conceptualization of these questions - including sub-questions - can be found 
in Annex B: Getting to Answers Matrix.   
 
Timeline 
 
74 Annex C provides a general list of inputs and processes, which can be reviewed and adapted to the Ugandan context.  
56 
 In order for findings from this analysis to be included as early as possible in the FY 2020 work plan of 
existing PMI mechanisms, PMI would like for this exercise to be completed by October 31, 2019.  
 
Dates M T W Th F 
9/16-9/20 Literature Search  
Reading Documents  
9/23-9/27 Reading Documents  
Writing Inception Report 9/27/19 
Submit Inception 
Report 
9/30-10/4 Reading Documents  
Quantitative Analysis  Finalization of Tools  
10/7-10/11 Key Informant Interviews  
10/14-10/18 Preliminary 
Analysis  
 
Preparation of 
Presentation  10/15/19  
Presentation of 
Preliminary 
Findings Transcript Coding and Thematic Analysis  
Quantitative Analysis 
 
 
10/21-10/25 Quantitative Analysis  
 
Writing of Draft Report  
10/28-10/31 Writing and Finalization of Draft Report  10/31/19  
Draft Due   
 
Duration of work: September 16 – October 31, 2019 
Number of days:  30 
 
The finalized draft of the report will be submitted within 5 working days of receipt of feedback from 
PMI. 
 
Deliverables  
a. Landscape analysis/report of existing USAID and partner inputs into data collection/utilization 
for malaria within the HMIS more generally, and DHIS-2 specifically. 
b. PowerPoint presentation of preliminary findings. 
c. Shared file with all reviewed documents. 
d. If requested, PowerPoint deck summarizing final draft of report  
  
57 
 Annex C:  Getting to Answers Matrix 
Evaluation Questions Sub-Questions Type of Answer 
Needed   Data Collection Methods 
& Tools Data Sources Sampling or Selection 
Criteria Data Analysis Methods 
Q1: What are the key inputs and 
processes that, if strengthened, 
would lead to the desired 
outcomes of timely reporting of 
malaria data, as well as optimal 
completeness, quality, and use 
particularly at the health facility 
and community levels?  
 What key inputs and 
processes need to be 
strengthened to improve 
timely reporting of 
malaria data at facility 
and community level?    
 Descriptive 
  Key Informant Interviews 
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Thematic Analysis  
What key inputs and 
processes need to be 
strengthened to improve 
completeness in 
reporting of malaria data 
at facility and community 
level?? 
 Descriptive Key Informant Interviews 
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants 
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Thematic Analysis 
What key inputs and 
processes need to be 
strengthened to improve 
quality reporting of 
malaria data at facility 
and community level? 
 Descriptive Key Informant Interviews 
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants 
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Thematic Analysis 
What key inputs and 
processes need to be 
strengthened to improve 
utilization of malaria data 
at facility and community 
level?? 
 Descriptive Key Informant Interviews 
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants 
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Thematic Analysis   
58 
 What patterns and trend 
exist with respect to 
timeliness, 
completeness, and 
quality in the weekly, 
monthly and quarterly 
malaria reporting data 
and what might these tell 
us about HMIS 
strengthening?    HMIS/DHIS-2, Weekly 
Epidemiology Malaria Reports 
and Quarterly Malaria 
Reports, AHSPR  Trend analysis, analysis of 
variance, cluster analysis and 
mapping 
Q2: Which of these key inputs 
and processes are already 
supported by donors and in which 
geographical areas?  
 
Since HMIS strengthening is not 
a disease specific intervention, 
this mapping should include 
investments from a broad list of 
donors such as PEPFAR, other 
USAID and CDC programs, DoD, 
DFID, Global Fund, GAVI, etc. 
 What do donors already 
support?  Descriptive 
  Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Mapping 
 
What is the exact 
financial contribution of 
that support? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Mapping 
Where is that support 
targeted geographically? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Mapping 
Where is that support 
targeted in terms of 
health system level? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles 
 Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Mapping 
Q3:   What are the gaps in 
supporting HMIS strengthening 
in Uganda and which of these 
gaps would make most sense for 
PMI to fill through existing 
mechanisms?  
 
 Where are the gaps in 
PMI support for HMIS 
strengthening? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation)  Gap Analysis 
Where are the gaps in 
partner support for 
HMIS strengthening? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Gap Analysis  
59 
 Is there consensus by 
stakeholders with 
respect to these gaps? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Gap Analysis 
Which gaps might be 
filled through existing 
mechanisms?  Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Gap Analysis 
Which gaps would 
require new 
mechanisms? Descriptive Key Informant Interviews  
(interview guide) 
 
Desk research (literature 
review) Key Informants  
 
Program literature, Grey 
literature, Published articles Purposive (expert and 
maximum variation) Gap Analysis  
60 
 Annex D:  Methodology 
Landscape Analysis Design 
This is a mixed-methods landscape analysis predominantly relying on qualitative data supported with 
quantitative evidence to understand programmatic and financial gaps in the present landscape of 
development assistance for Uganda’s HMIS/DHIS-2, particularly with respect to timely, complete, high 
quality malaria data and its utilization for evidence-based decision-making at sub-national level. 
 
The focus is on identifying these gaps, explaining and exploring the reasons for these gaps, and then 
translating findings into a strategic direction for future PMI HMIS investments, especially in the context 
of limited resources. 
 
Data Sources  
The landscape analysis relies predominantly on a) a review of key GoU, PMI, USG agency, and partner 
documents supplemented by literature sourced from PubMed and Google Scholar; b) key informant (KI) 
interviews at national level; and c) targeted quantitative analysis of HMIS/DHIS-2 malaria data at district, 
facility and, if possible, community level. 
 
Literature review  
The landscape analysis will review program documentation related to both malaria-specific and general 
HMIS support from the GoU, PMI, PEPFAR, USAID, CDC, Department of Defense,  UK Department 
for International Development (DfID), Global Fund (GF), Global Access to Vaccines Initiative (GAVI), 
World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI), USG M&E-
specific implementing partners, and USG regional and service delivery implementing partners (e.g. 
RHITES, MAPD, METS, SITES, etc.).  
 
Key Informant (KI) Interviews  
The landscape analysis will carry out interviews with key stakeholders in the financing, implementation, 
and management of the national HMIS, especially with respect to malaria.  KIs will be identified 
purposively  following consultation with PMI. KIs will be selected across a range of categories.  A 
preliminary list of institutions to target for KIIs includes: 
 
Category  Key Informants (where available)  
Government of Uganda  ● MoH National Malaria Control Division  
● MoH Resource Centre/Division of Health Information  
USG ● USAID Uganda Strategic Information Team  
● CDC Uganda  
Development Partners  ● DfID 
● Global Fund  
Technical Agencies  ● WHO  
● UNICEF 
● CHAI  
Implementing Partners  ● Malaria Action Program for Districts/Malaria Consortium  
● USAID RHITES (SW, E, EC, Lango, Acholi) 
● USAID/SSS SITES  
● CDC/MUSPH METS 
● Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP)  
● Frontline Program  
● TASO 
● IDRC 
  
61 
 The analysis will seek to carry out between 15-20 interviews, although some organizations may prefer to 
conduct group interviews. 
 
Secondary Data Sets  
Secondary datasets may include DHIS-2, the Malaria Indicator Survey (MIS), Malaria Quarterly Reports 
from 2016-2019, Annual Health Sector Performance Reports (AHSPR), Health Services District League 
Tables, Weekly Epidemiology and Surveillance Reports, and any other relevant data source. 
 
Data Collection 
 
Literature Review 
The review selected literature purposively based on recommendations from PMI Uganda. It also looked 
for academic and grey literature - published after 2012 - both within PubMed and Google Scholar 
utilizing the search strings: 
1. (("Uganda") AND ("HMIS") OR ("DHIS") OR ("information system")) AND (("data") AND 
("quality") OR ("complete") OR ("timely") OR ("use") OR ("utilization") OR (“reporting”)) 
2. (("Uganda") AND ("HMIS") OR ("DHIS") OR ("information system")) AND (("financing") OR 
("investment")) 
The cut-off date of 2012 was selected due to this year being the year in which DHIS2 was 
adopted 
 
Key Informant (KI) Interviews  
Category-specific, semi-structured interview guides have been developed to prompt stakeholder 
discussion as to relevant key issues: bottlenecks to reporting/utilization, current investment landscape, 
gaps in the investment landscape, and ideas on strategic investment opportunities. These guides are 
available in Annex D and are still under review.  
 
These guides are not meant as closed-ended surveys but rather as a series of prompts to ensure that 
key informants touch upon all themes relevant to that particular category of stakeholder. The goals of 
the guides are a) to ensure consistency across interviews should team members end up responsible for 
different interviews and b) to allow KIs to elaborate on the issues they feel are most pertinent to 
learning.  
 
It is assumed that KIs may have very different opinions and perspectives and so KI interviews not only 
seek out patterns of consensus, but also are interested in divergent points of view. The interview guides 
will aim to ensure that interviews last no longer than 45 minutes, although if an organization prefers to 
convene groups of KIs rather than carry out one-on-one discussions, interviews may last longer.   
 
Note:  some interviews – particularly those with regional implementing partners who may be based 
outside of Kampala – may have to be conducted by phone.   
  
KI interviews will be conducted by 1-2 interviewers, who will trade off managing recording of interviews 
and taking additional notes. Interviews will be conducted in English. Due to the rapid nature of the 
landscape analysis, it will not be possible to transcribe interviews in their entirety.  All interview notes 
will be transcribed, and recordings listened to a second time to flesh out notes and add clarifications.  
 
Secondary Data Sets 
Key qualitative secondary data sets may include, but are not limited to, DHIS-2 (both quarterly and 
monthly reports), Malaria Weekly Epidemiology and Surveillance Reports, Health Services District 
League Tables, Annual Health Sector Performance Report and any other source that will be deemed 
necessary. 
 
Data Analysis 
  
62 
 Qualitative Data  
Transcripts from interview notes and existing documentation will be analyzed thematically, using codes 
assigned a priori based on the landscape analysis questions and, via grounded theory, emerging themes 
developed collectively over the duration of the fieldwork.  
 
Secondary Data Sets  
Quantitative data will be analyzed for location/level of health facility variance and trends in order to 
answer specific questions about patterns in timeliness, completeness, and quality over time (2014-2019) 
so as to strengthen the evidence base for recommendations for strategic investment. We will investigate 
regional-, district-, and facility-level variance, along with variances depending on direct or indirect 
implementing partners, etc.. In terms of trends, we will determine the effect of time – month and year - 
on the quality of reporting for the period 2016 to 2019. 
 
Ethical Considerations 
 
Because of the limited time and resources available for the analysis, this inception report cannot be 
passed through separate IRB channels. The primary review mechanism will be the review of the 
inception report by the USAID/PMI and M&E teams in Uganda.  As the assessment involves interviews 
with human subjects, some restrictions on fieldwork and the categories of interview subject apply. 
 
First, KIs must be professional and/or technical experts who are clearly cognizant of being a stakeholder 
in Uganda’s national HMIS/DHIS-2, either as a member of government or as a development partner, 
technical expert, or implementing partner. Second, they must be able and willing to provide informed 
oral consent following a short briefing of the nature and purpose of the assessment.  Third, the analysis 
must engage them solely regarding their professional expertise, technical experience, and opinion about 
elements of the Uganda HMIS/DHIS-2, especially in relation to malaria data. 
 
The team will ensure confidentiality of KI transcripts/notes by allocating a unique code to each KI, then 
labelling the KI’s transcript with the relevant code. A separate document will be kept linking the code to 
the KI’s identifying information (subjects' names, place of work, contact information). Only the team will 
be allowed access to the document containing identifying information, as well as to the transcripts/notes. 
Following the completion of dissemination documents, all copies of transcripts/notes will be turned over 
to QED, where they be securely held for a period of one year, at which point they will be destroyed. 
The document containing identifying information will be held separately by the team and destroyed as 
well. 
  
Within dissemination documents (reports, presentations), quotes or information provided by subjects 
will be identified by the code on the transcript, and potentially by a general professional category if their 
perspectives are clearly informed by their professional position. However, no additional information 
(such as name, title, or name of the office in which the subject works) will be attached to quotes, in 
order to ensure that the KI cannot be identified. By focusing on expertise, experiences, and insights 
specifically in relation to HMIS/DHIS-2 and, specifically, malaria data in Uganda, the assessment seeks to 
minimize risk and maximize benefit for key informants.  
 
Quality Control 
 
Because of the limited time and resources available for this landscape analysis, more extensive quality 
control measures will not be possible.  In order to improve consistency, validity, and replicability of 
findings, the following steps have been taken: 
● Development and use of Getting to Answers matrix (Annex B) created and filled in with review 
and input from key stakeholders. 
● Iterative review of the matrix by team members with a view to further refinement or extension. 
● Development and use of collaboratively developed standardized interview guidelines and other 
data collection tools.  
63 
 ● Sharing of anonymized transcripts and notes for collaborative editing and cross-checking of 
accuracy. 
● Preliminary presentation of findings for input and critique by PMI and other partners. 
● Dissemination of Draft Landscape Analysis for further input. 
  
Limitations  
 
Given the limited time available for this analysis, certain questions will lack both breadth of data 
collection and a representative sampling of KIs will not be possible. The purpose of this landscape 
analysis, however, is to gain an understanding of stakeholder perspectives on how HMIS/DHIS-2 in 
Uganda has (or has not been) been working with respect to malaria data and their ideas about possible 
areas for investment in the future. With this in mind, interviewing partners with a vested stake in the 
national HMIS and with a depth of understanding about how malaria data is collected and utilized is 
deemed most important. 
  
Availability of quality and adequate malaria data in the HIMS/DHIS-2 will also pose limitations during this 
assessment, especially with respect to efforts to identify and map gaps. The team will highlight the data 
limitations in the analysis and explain how these limitations were addressed. 
  
Use of the Landscape Analysis  
 
This landscape analysis will be used by PMI to inform strategic decisions with respect to future 
investment in Uganda’s national HMIS/DHIS-2.   
  
64 
 Annex E:  Interview Guides 
Note:  Interview guides are meant to guide open-ended discussion. They are not meant to represent 
close-ended survey questions.  “Possible follow up questions” are only for where/when relevant and if 
the issues in question have not already been discussed in conversation.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
Thank you very much for setting aside time to talk with us today.  
 
We’ve been asked by PMI to conduct a landscape analysis of US government and partner investment in 
Uganda’s national HMIS and DHIS-2, especially with respect to malaria data, in order to provide PMI some 
insight into strategic investment in the national information system going forward.   
 
We are not evaluating or assessing these other investments. We are just simply interested in understanding what 
has been done in the past and what, based on stakeholders’ opinions, should be done in the future to improve 
the timeliness, completeness, quality and use of malaria data in Uganda.   
 
The information collected will be used to help PMI planning going forward.  Any information or examples we 
discuss during this interview will be confidential. You are also free not to respond to any of the questions or to 
stop the interview at any time.  
 
We are hoping to keep this discussion to about 45 minutes and can make it shorter if you are pressed for time. 
 
We were wondering if it would be ok to record this interview? Doing so will allow us to focus on the discussion 
instead of taking notes.  
 
Before we begin, do you have any questions?  
 
 
Questions for Partners 
 
Question Set 1 (refers to SOW Q2) 
 
1.1 What sorts of activities are [name of organization/office/department] currently supporting with 
respect to the HMIS/DHIS-2?  
Possible follow up questions: 
  Is this general to the HMIS/DHIS-2, or specific to malaria data? 
  Clarify on level and geographic area.  
  Has the nature of [name of organization/office/department] support changed over time? That 
is, are you supporting different activities in 2019 than you were doing in, say, 2016? If so, why? 
  How do you see the support [name of organization/office/department] provides to the 
HMIS/DHIS-2 potentially changing in the future? Clarify on level and geographic area.  
 
Question Set 2 (refers to SOW Q1) :   
 
2.1.1.  What do you perceive as the key barriers to timely reporting of malaria data by facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions? Or do different districts or 
regions have different barriers?  
65 
   Are these barriers shared equally across facility levels? 
  Are these barriers shared equally across public and private facilities? 
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.1.2. What do you see as key barriers to timely reporting of malaria data by VHTs?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally by VHTs across all districts or regions?   
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.1.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.2.1.  What do you see as key barriers to completeness of malaria data reported by facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels? 
  Are these barriers shared equally across public and private facilities? 
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.2.2. What do you see as key barriers to completeness of malaria data reported by VHTs?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally by VHTs across all districts or regions? 
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.2.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.3.1.  What do you see as key barriers to the quality or accuracy of the malaria data being reported by 
facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels? 
  Are these barriers shared equally across public and private facilities? 
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.3.2. What do you see as key barriers to the quality or accuracy of the malaria data being reported by 
VHTs?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.3.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.4.1.  What do you see as key barriers to the utilization of malaria data by facilities for planning?   
Possible follow up questions:   
66 
   Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels?  
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.4.2.  What do you see as key barriers to the utilization of malaria data collected by VHTs at 
community level?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across communities in all districts or regions?   
  Has [name of organization/office/department] sought to address this?  If so, how?  
 
2.4.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
Question Set 3  (refers to SOW Q3) 
 
3.1 Looking at current overall support for the Uganda HMIS – the landscape of activities that PMI and 
other partners are presently contributing to – which do you think have been most effective? Why? 
 
Possible follow up questions:  
  With respect to specifically PMI investments in the HMIS, which do you think have been 
most effective? Why? 
  Which sorts of activities do you think have not been as effective? Why? 
 
3.2 Where do you see gaps in investment by partners?   
  If you were to highlight gaps specifically in PMI investment in the Uganda HMIS, which would 
you highlight? What have PMI not been targeting with respect to information system 
strengthening that they should be targeting? 
  Is there anything specifically that PMI is targeting for investment in the HMIS that it should 
not be targeting. 
  Are there other elements of the HMIS that could be strengthened by partners that are not 
presently being strengthened? 
 
3.3 If you had a limited set of resources with which to invest in HMIS strengthening, especially for 
malaria, what would you prioritize?   
 
Thank You For Your Time! 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
Questions for MoH/GoU Stakeholders 
 
Question Set 1 (refers to SOW Q2) 
 
1.1 What sorts of activities are partners currently supporting with respect to the HMIS/DHIS-2?  
Possible follow up questions:75 
  Is this general to the HMIS/DHIS-2, or specific to malaria data? 
  Clarify on level and geographic area.  
 
75 Possible follow up questions = only where/when relevant and if issues have not already been discussed in conversation.  
67 
   Has the nature of partner support to the HMIS/DHIS-2 – in particular, with respect to 
malaria data - changed over time? That is, are different activities being supported in 2019 than, 
say, 2016? If so, why? 
  How do you see partner support to the HMIS/DHIS-2 potentially changing in the future? 
Clarify on level and geographic area.  
 
Question Set 2 (refers to SOW Q1) :   
 
2.1.1.  What do you perceive as the key barriers to timely weekly reporting of malaria data by facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions? Or do different districts or 
regions have different barriers? 
  Are these barriers shared equally across facility levels? 
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.1.2. What do you see as key barriers to timely weekly reporting of malaria data by VHTs?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally by VHTs across all districts or regions?   
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.1.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.2.1.  What do you see as key barriers to completeness of malaria data reported by facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels? 
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.2.2. What do you see as key barriers to completeness of malaria data reported by VHTs?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.2.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.3.1.  What do you see as key barriers to the quality or accuracy of the malaria data being reported by 
facilities?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels? 
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.3.2. What do you see as key barriers to the quality or accuracy of the malaria data being reported by 
VHTs?    
68 
 Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.3.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
** 
2.4.1.  What do you see as key barriers to the utilization of the malaria data by facilities for planning?   
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  Are these shared equally across facility levels?  
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.4.2.  What do you see as key barriers to the utilization of the malaria data collected by VHTs at the 
community level?  
Possible follow up questions:  
  Which of these do you think are most important?  
  Are these barriers shared equally across districts or regions?   
  How has the Ministry sought to address this?   
 
2.4.3 In your opinion, what sorts of investments or activities might help to address these barriers? 
 
Question Set 3  (refers to SOW Q3) 
 
3.1 Looking at current overall support for the Uganda HMIS – the landscape of activities that PMI and 
other partners are presently contributing to – which do you think have been most effective? Why? 
 
Possible follow up questions:  
  With respect to specifically PMI investments in the HMIS, which do you think have been 
most effective? Why? 
  Which sorts of activities do you think have not been as effective? Why? 
 
3.2 Where do you see gaps in investment in the HMIS by partners?   
Possible follow up questions:   
  Why do you think these areas have not received attention from partners? 
  If you were to highlight gaps specifically in PMI investment in the Uganda HMIS, which would 
you highlight? What have PMI not been targeting with respect to information system 
strengthening that they should be targeting? 
  By contrast, is there anything specifically that PMI is targeting for investment in information 
system strengthening that it should not be targeting. 
 
3.3 If you had a limited set of resources with which to invest in HMIS strengthening, especially for 
malaria, what sorts of activities would you prioritize?  
 
Thank You For Your Time   
69 
 Annex F: Analysis of Variance with Respect to HC II Findings 
 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for reporting rates yielded significant p-values (p = 0.000) for both 
regions and activities as shown in Figure 10. The analysis of variance suggests that regions and 
activities have differences in mean reporting rates. Pairwise comparisons among regions suggest that 
there are six (6) distinct groups among regions, with West Nile leading with 92.8%, while Kampala is 
the last with 46.4% reporting rate. On the other hand, pairwise comparisons among activities 
indicate that all activities have different reporting rates, with RHITES Lango leading at 83.1%, while 
RHITES EC comes last with 60.6%. 
 
Reporting Rate  
Attribute  
  F Value  Degree of 
Freedom P-Value 
  Significant Differences observed among 
groups 
  
Regions 475.87 14 0.000 West Nile (92.8)  
Tooro, Kigezi, Bukedi, Bunyoro, Karamoja (82 – 
83) 
Teso, Acholi, south central (69 – 70.8) 
North Central (64.0) 
Busoga (59.7) 
Kampala (46.4) 
Activities 439.68 5 0.000 RHITES Lango (83.1)  
RHITES SW (80.9) 
RHITES E (76.2) 
MAPD (75.3) 
RHITES Acholi (69.6) 
RHITES EC (60.6) All Activities have different 
means reporting rates 
 
   
70 
 Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for reporting rates generated significant p-values (p = 0.000) for both 
regions and Activities as shown in Figure 11. The results show that regions and Activities have 
differences in mean reporting on time. Pairwise comparisons among regions suggest that there are 
eight (8) distinct groups among regions, with West Nile leading with 65.1%, while Kampala is the last 
with 32.2% reporting rate. On the other hand, pairwise comparisons among activities indicate that 
RHITES SW and E have a similar reporting on time rate, all the activities have different reporting on 
time rates. West Nile leads with 65.1%, while RHITES EC comes last with 43.0%. 
 
Reporting on Time  
Attribute  
  F Value  Degree 
of 
Freedom  P-Value 
  Significant Differences observed among 
groups 
  
Regions  286.29  14  0.000  West Nile (65.1)  
Ankole, Bugisu and Karamoja (58.8 – 60.0) 
Tooro, Bukedi, Lango (54.0 – 54.8) 
Kigezi, Bunyoro, Teso (49.5 – 51.3) 
South Central, Acholi (47.0 – 47.6) 
North Central (43.5) 
Busoga (41.0) 
Kampala (32.2)   
Activities 227.50 5 0.000 RHITES SW, RHITES E (55.8 – 56.9) 
RHITES Lango (54.0) 
MAPD (51.8) 
RHITES Acholi (47.0) 
RHITES EC (43.0) Almost all Activities have 
different mean reporting non time  
 
 