 
  
The K4D helpdesk service provides brief summaries of current research, evidence, and lessons 
learned. Helpdesk reports are not rigorous or systematic reviews; they are intended to provide an 
introduction to the most important evidence related to a research  question. They draw on a rapid desk -
based review of published literature and consultation with subject specialists.  
Helpdesk reports are commissioned by the UK Department for International Development and other 
Government departments, but the views and o pinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of 
DFID, the UK Government, K4D or any other contributing organisation. For further information, please 
contact helpdesk@k4d.info.  
Helpdesk Report   
Digital Technologies Use in 
Development  Programme Design, 
Delivery and M&E in Fragile and 
Conflict -Affected Setting  
 
Dr. Becky Faith  
Institute  of Development Studies  
29 May 2019  
Question  
How are digital technologies used to support development programme design, delivery and M&E 
in Fragile and Conflict Affected States (FCAS)? What positive and negative effects have been 
observed?  
Contents  
1. Summary  
2. Overall Approach  
3. Development Programme Design and Delivery  
4. Unique Risks from Digital Technologies in Conflict and Humanitarian Settings   
5. M&E  in FCAS  
6.    References  
 
  2 1. Summary  
This report covers the use of digital technologies for programmes and for M&E in FCAS. It shows 
how digital technologies have a wide range of potential uses in both peacebuilding programmes 
and in the reconstruction of postconflict states. These uses should be informed by key principles 
such as DFID’s endorsement of the Principles for Digital Development , a commitment to 
understanding the digital context and a consideration of the privacy and security of the data of 
people caught up in conflict.  
However, a review of the literature  shows that there  is little best practice yet for evaluating the 
effect of t echnology tools on peacebuilding . In terms of M&E, the  literature consistently highlights 
the problems caused by lack of data in FCA S but there are also significant challenges in 
collecting and storing data in line with the goals of the Responsible Data mo vement. There are  
significant  risks posed by humanitarian and development actors using data -intensive approaches 
without due consideration of the risks to beneficiaries that these approaches might involve.  
2. Overall Approach  
The overall approach to the incor poration of digital technologies for programmes in FCAS should 
be underpinned by key policy frameworks. These include DFID’s own digital strategy, which 
shows both the Department’s commitment to mainstreaming digital in the way it delivers, 
monitors and ev aluates aid and development work,  and also their role as a world leader in setting 
standards for others to follow in digital development practices (The Department for International 
Development 2018) . DFID ’s endorsement of the Principles for Digital Development (Department 
for International Development 2015)  is part of this process of standard setting. The Principles 
state,  amongst other things, a commitment to understand the existing context and ecosystem – 
taking account of gender norms, political environment, economy, technology infrastructure 
structures and needs that exist in each country, region and co mmunity. The Principles also 
emphasise  the importance of addressing privacy and security issues, as well as the need for 
user-centred design and co -creation.  These three principles: of understanding the context, of the 
primacy of digital privacy and securi ty and of user -centred design, underpin this paper. The 
urgency of considering the privacy and security of the data of people caught up in conflict is also 
particularly important when one considers the role of information in modern conflicts, as reflected 
in the work of Berman  et al.  (2018)  which sees information asymmetry – the knowledge citizens 
possess about insurgent activities  – as the key factor determining which side has the upper hand 
in an asymmetr ic conflict.   
Other principles which are vital to incorporate are the Whole of Society  approach : which sees 
that peacebuilding and conflict -prevention processes should be inclusive of a wide range of 
actors . In her work on ICTs and peacebuilding through a  whole of society approach, Gaskell 
stresses both the normative and operational aspects of this approach and shows how digital 
technologies offer both the “ the opportunity to bridge the gap between grassroots/community and 
political processes; and the chal lenge of undertaking coherent implementation at the political and 
grassroots levels ” (2016: 13) .  3 3. Development Programme Design and Delivery  
Operationalising programme design can be understood from two angles: peacebuilding 
technologies and technology for post -conflict reconstruction. But first, we can see from the 
literature the importance of adapting to the particular context. In their work on  ‘ New Technology 
and the Prevention of Violence and Conflict ’, Mancini and Riley demonstrate the need for 
different approaches in different contexts depending on political stability and information flows; 
“the types of technology that link civil, governmental, and regional early -warning efforts in a 
relatively stable setting, such as K enya, may have limited impact in an environment where 
governments act precisely to restrict such information flows, as happened in Kyrgyzstan ” (2013) . 
The authors recom mend that governments should make needs assessments and feasibility 
studies standard practice to prevent the supply of technology from outstripping the demand.  They 
show the importance of complementing technological ‘fixes’ with offline strategies; “ when t rying 
to integrate operational prevention (targeting a crisis at hand) and structural prevention 
(addressing root causes of conflict), new technologies should be accompanied by more 
traditional tools, such as preventive diplomacy, governance reforms, and e conomic initiatives ”. 
3.1 Understanding the digital context  
Given Mancini and Riley ’s emphasis on the need to understand the context, understanding the 
particular digital  context in which a development intervention is taking place is vital. This means 
unde rstanding patterns of connectivity in different regions and demographic groups, as well as 
the overall state of the free flow of information online in a particular context.  
Indicators that are valuable for these purposes include those for global internet statistics from the 
ITU (International Telecommunication Union 2018)  and mobile connectivity statistics from the 
GSMA (2019) . When examining these indicators, it is important to understand who is, and is not 
connected. DFID research on Leaving No -One Be hind in a Digital World (Hernandez and 
Roberts 2018)  shows how new digital divides are leading to new  exclusions  which  often reflect, 
reproduce and amplify gender, racial and caste/class divides : leaving  the digitally disadvantaged 
to experie nce widening inequalities. The paper suggests that ‘ Development professionals require 
new diagnostic tools to analyse the digital access and everyday technology practices of those 
being left behind in their area of work’.  An example of this is the use of s ocial media data for 
peacebuilding and conflict analysis; whilst social media data can reveal aspects of violent events 
that cannot be captured by traditional media  (Roberts and Marchais 2018) , use of this data risks  
excluding the voices of the digitally left behind since  social media are not used by all classes and 
generations alike . Tellidis and Kapler warn of the risks of social media data a s well as the built -in 
data biases of information databases and collection services  which  ‘tend to be run and designed 
by expert -organisations ’ (2016). Asymmetries in access to, and use of technologies impact on 
the approaches suggested by Berman et al.  (2018)  in the information -centric approach proposed 
in ‘Small Wars, Big Data ’. They recommend th e expansion of mobile phone coverage as a 
means to reduce insurgent violence – which they suggest makes it easier for citizens to inform. 
However, entrenched structural inequalities mean that issues such as gender norms are likely to 
limit access to techno logy, even when mobile phone coverage is made more generally available 
to the broader community (Hernandez and Roberts 2018) . 
Another significant dimension of the digital context is freedom of expression online which 
inevitably impacts on the free flow of information between governments and citizens. As 
governments worldwide increasingly use internet shut downs to suppress online  debate at times 4 of conflict – with 188 shut downs recorded in 2018 (Access Now 2019)  – issues of internet 
openness are becoming more important. Frameworks such as ‘Internet Universality’  provided by 
UNESCO (Souter and Van de Spuy 2019)  cover issues such as internet rights and openness, 
cross -cutting indicators to address gender equality and the needs of children and young peop le, 
economic dimensions, trust and security, as well as legal and ethical aspects of the internet  
3.2 Technology in peacebuilding  
In recent years, interest has grown in the role that technology might play in peacebuilding. A 
report on peacebuilding in Syri a by the British Council and Build Up outlined three functions 
technology might play (2016) : 
1. Peacebuilding initiatives: data (aggregation, gathering, analysis, visualisation);  
2. Communication (more voices, alternative narratives, sharing information);  
3. Networking and mobilisation (alternative spaces, engagement towards collective action).  
Technology for peacebuilding or ‘ peacetech ’ is defined  as “an emerging body of peacebuilding 
practice which includes a technological component that is of strategic importance to  its 
objective(s)”  (British Council/Build Up 2016: 2) . In the Syrian context the authors outline three 
areas where there is extensive local capacity that could be supported with peacetech initiatives :  
 
1. Local and smaller  scale media initiatives that could benefit from strategic 
communications support ; 
2. Creative / artistic initiatives that could benefit from access to technology tools and 
processes ; 
3. Supporting  local actors who want to learn other technolog y tools and processes to 
support their work . 
The Whole of Society approach informs the approach to peacetech;  "This is also emphasised by 
the processes that are recommended to implement 'peacetech' initiatives: participatory, user -
centred design, local ow nership and sustainability, through infrastructure or by fostering local 
innovation, conflict sensitivity (doing no harm) and learning and adaptation from other contexts” 
(Gaskell 2016) . 
The ‘affordances’ of technology can be used for both positive and negative purposes  in 
peacebuilding; put simply, technology can be used for or against peace. F our affordances of 
technology have generally been used in peacebuilding contexts: data, communication, 
networking and mobilisation. This communicative affordance can be both posit ive and negative: 
“…technologies used to spread messages of peace in volatile environments can also be used to 
spread inflammatory rumours. In order to have meaningful impact when introduced through 
external support, ICTs need to be both appropriate and su stainable in a given context."  (Gaskell 
et al.  2015: 3) . Tellidis and Kappler warn of how technology can reinforce existing imbalances but 
can also mobilise grassroots actors. They provide examples where this mobilisation has affected 
balances of power; showing how technology can “ decentralise and re -circulate the input of liberal 
peacebuilding (hegemonic power, or tendencies towards) with a different output (mobilisation 
towards more inclusionary peace)”. They cite the examples of “ Kenya ’s preventive violence 
network (Jorgic, 2013), Uganda ’s election monitoring (Hellstr öm and Karef elt, 2012), Sudan ’s low 5 tech adaptations for community communications (Puig Larrauri, 2013a), Cyprus’ civil society 
empowerment (UNDP, 2008) ” (2016: 9) . 
Given how new the field is, it is unsurprising that there is, to date, little work looking at the overall 
impact of peacetech projects. What is more, the British Council/Build Up report warns that there 
is no best  practice yet for evaluating the effect of technology tools on peacebuilding (British 
Council/Build Up 2016) .  
3.3 Case studies of technology visual documentation for 
peacebuilding and accountability  
Two case studies of innovative appro aches to visual documentation show the potential of new 
technologies to generate new insights and mechanisms for accountability and peacebuilding.  
Case studies; The Syrian Archive and The Security Force Monitor  
User -generated videos depicting first -hand ac counts from the war in Syria were vanishing from the 
internet by the thousands. The Syrian Archive  (https://syrianarchive.org/en ) develops new open 
source tools as well as providing a transparent and replicable methodology for collecting, preserving, 
verifying and investigating visual documentation in conflict areas.  Visual documentation of human 
rights violations that is transparent, detailed, and reliable are critical towards providing accountability  
and can po sitively contribute to post -conflict reconstruction and stability. Such documentation can 
humanise victims, reduce the space for dispute over numbers killed, help societies understand the true 
human costs of war, and support truth and reconciliation effort s. 
The Security Force Monitor  (https://securityforcemonitor.org/about/  ) works to make police, 
military and other security forces around the world more transparent and accountable.  There is a vast 
amount of public information on security forces around the world, but it is unstructured and scattered 
among a wide variety of sources, making it prohibitively costly for those engaged in public interest 
work to understand the security forces of a particul ar country.  The Security Force Monitor aims to solve 
this problem and aid those working to make police, military and other security forces accountable  
3.4 Post -conflict reconstruction  
In the field of inclusive, post -conflict peacebuilding and statebuilding , Tellidis and Kapler warn of 
the danger that governments and international agencies will use digital technology merely as a 
promotional tool: “ …if they try to promote pre -determined understandings of peace and are 
operated in a top -down manner, they will most likely fail, backfire or even become dangerous for 
the populations they attempt to support” (2016) . A World Bank study from 2014 explored th e ‘The 
role of information and communication technologies in postconflict reconstruction ’ (Souter and 
Kelly 2014)  and outlined four key areas where technology might contribute:  
1. Stabilisation : coord inating government departments and other agencies involved in 
peacemaking and planning for the future  6 2. Infrastructure : But communications infrastructure on its own is not enough. 
Communications networks need complementary infrastructure, especially electric  power.  
3. Reconciliation, media and public engagement : Rebuild ing public engagement in politics 
and national development.  
4. Public engagement : Widen access to such public fora can help promote diversity of voice, 
and protect anonymity .  
In a blog post from 2 017, one of the reports’ authors reflects on the importance  of adapting to 
different contexts and the importance of avoiding ‘one size fits all’ approaches; “ What worked in 
Liberia or Bosnia fifteen or twenty years ago won't necessarily (or even probably) work in South 
Sudan or Syria tomorrow – though looking at past experience may well be useful, particularly 
concerning how displaced communities learnt to gain confidence from one another in returning to 
their former lives ” (Souter 2017) . 
4. Unique risks from digital technologies in conflict and 
humanitarian settings  
The sheer amount of data being collected on beneficiaries of humanitarian assistance has led to 
what has been described as a ‘dataholic’ envi ronment in the sector: with an urgent need to 
increase understanding of how these data-intensive systems and the use of technology is 
affecting individuals and communities  (Pirlot de Corbion 2019) .   
The risks posed by manipulation of ordinary citizens’ social media data were highlighted by the 
involvement of the firm Cambridge Analytica aiming to skew the results of the Kenyan election  
(Madowo 2018) . Earlier this year there was widespread concern at t he proposed partnership 
between the CIA-linked software firm Palantir with the  UN’s World Food Programme  (WFP)  
(Parker 2019)  which lead to an open letter accusing the WFP of ‘ Undermining the humanitarian 
principle s’ and of a lack of transparency an d accountability (Responsible Data Community 2019) . 
A recent article in Nature demonstrated the very r eal risks of ‘data for good’ programmes in 
conflict settings; satellite images of a new road in Sudan that could be used to transport tanks 
and weapons  were posted online; t wo days later, a Sudanese rebel group ambushed a 
construction crew near an intersec tion in one of the photos, and took 29 people hostage . The 
article reflects on the use of mobile phone data for humanitarian purposes; showing how 95% of 
1.5 million callers in an anonymi sed mobile -phone data set can be identified  with j ust four data 
point s per person  (Maxmen 2019) . 
The overall challenges faced by the d evelopment and humanitarian sector in “Doing no harm”  in 
the digital age  were summarised by Privacy International.  
Privacy International: Doing no harm in the digital age  
Weak problem analysis:  In a ‘dataholic’ environment there are internal and external drivers pushing the 
development and humanitarian sectors to adopt data -intensive, tech solutions without a clear 
understanding of the problem they are attempting to solve;  7 Unpreparedness in the sector : The awareness of the need to protect an individual and their 
information/identity has been a core eleme nt of development and humanitarian programmes since their 
inception, and yet few realise what this means in a digital age. This poor knowledge means that whatever 
assessments are currently undertaken, if at all, are insufficient to understand the consequen ces of the 
solutions proposed, and therefore fail to flag the negative consequences which must be offset and the 
risks which should be considered;  
Increasing number of intermediaries : As they are not building the devices, networks and software on 
which the y are becoming increasing reliant, humanitarian and development actors have to engage with 
an increasing number of intermediaries, primarily from the private sector. This means that they are 
subject to the business models of these companies and have little  or no control over the data they 
process;  
Lack of transparency of the surveillance ecosystem : There continues to be little or no transparency of 
the surveillance ecosystem in the countries in which development and humanitarian programmes are 
being deploye d.  (Privacy I nternational 2019)  
 
The risks incurred by the introduction of new biometric technologies led OXFAM to declare a 
moratorium on the use of these technologies. Yet a report on the issues (Rahman, Verhaert and 
Nyst 2018)  shows how there is  increased pressure by international donors to integrate biometrics 
into a id delivery . 
4.1 Responsible data and ‘do no harm’  
The challenges caused by the increased volume of data gathered on the beneficiaries of 
humanitarian and development assistance, have met with a robust response from civil society 
organisations and some don ors who have mobilised to support the principles of ‘responsible 
data’: which is “ a concept outlining our collective duty to prioritise and respond to the ethical, 
legal, social and privacy -related challenges that come from using data in new and different ways 
in advocacy and social change” (‘What is Responsible Data?’ n.d.) . Key donors and sta keholders 
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (‘Responsible Data - Data Playbook 
(Beta)’ 2019)  and USAID (USAID 2019)  have released their own guidance and advice. A recent 
blog on the topic called for donors to put increased efforts into gai ning a nuanced and localised 
understanding of people’s relations to data (Raftree 2019) . 
5. M&E in Fragile and Conflict -Affected States (FCAS)  
It can be seen from the discussion above on responsible data that collecting data in conflict 
settings poses particular challenges.  The literature consistently highlights the prob lems caused 
by lack of data in FCAS. Data is key for  decision -making; lack of baseline data makes it difficult 
to track progress and identify changes  (Idris 2019) . A report on ‘ ICTs for Monitoring & E valuation 
of Peacebuilding Programmes ’ (Corlazzoli and White 2014)  found that ‘ the sector struggles on 8 how best to overcome key conceptual and practical challenges ’. The report highlighted the 
tension between the need to identi fy, collect, and process key data  to inform immediate decision 
making, whilst responding to complex and entrenched issues. The report outlines a series of 
questions to ask before introducing technology to an M&E system.  
Introducing a new technology to a mo nitoring and evaluation system : questions to ask  
 Will the new technology /technologies that I have chosen help or hinder the data collection 
process?  
 Is the new technology that I am applying culturally and contextually appropriate?  
 Are the necessary infra structure systems in place in the implementation area to support the new 
technologies?  
 Will the new technology cause harm to staff, data -sources, or the overall contextual situation?  
 Will the time and resources needed to create or adapt the new technolog y and learn how to 
implement it outweigh other benefits?  
 Does the staff have the professional capacity or technological literacy to apply the new 
technology? If not, are additional resources required? Have these been included in the 
programme budget?  
 Will the new technology introduce bias? If so, how can bias be reduced or tested for?  
 What training and technological considerations are required to ensure the safety and security of 
staff, data -source, and data in the short and long term?  
 Will the technolo gy help make monitoring and evaluation processes more efficient? Will it 
enable better sharing of results with all key stakeholders, including programme participants? 
Will it enable for quicker evidence -based decisions? (Corlazzoli and White 2014: 10)  
 
A similar approach is taken by Scharbatke -Church and Patel in their guide to ‘ Technology for 
Evaluation in Fragile and Conflict Affected States ’ (2016) . They offer a five -point decision filter for 
evaluators using technology i n their work.  
1. Does the evaluation scenario meet the preconditions necessary for using any form of 
technology?  
2. Is technology the right fit for the evaluation context?  
3. Will using technology in the evaluation do harm?  
4. What is the existing organizational technology?  
5. Do the practicalities of the evaluation allow for using technology?  
  9 6. References  
Access Now (2019) ‘#KeepItOn’, Access Now , blog, , https://www.accessnow.org/keepiton/  
(accessed 29 May 2019)  
Berman, E.; Felter, J.H. and Shapiro, J.N. (2018) Small Wars, Big Data: The Information 
Revolution in Modern Conflict , Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press  
British Council/Build Up (2016) Innovative Peacebuilding in Syri a, British Council/Build Up, 
https://creativeconomy.britishcouncil.org/media/uploads/files/Peacetech_Report_Web_En.pdf  
(accessed 23 May 2019)  
Corlazzoli, V. and White, J. (2014) ICTs for Monitoring & Evaluation of Peacebuilding 
Programmes , DFID and Search for Common Ground, https://www.sfcg.org/wp -
content/uploads/2014/05/CCVRI -SSP-_ICT -and-ME-_Final.pdf  
Department for International Development (2015) ‘The Principles for Digital Development’, 
https://digitalprinciples.org/principles/  (accessed 3 December 201 5) 
Gaskell, J. (2016) ICTs & EU civilian peacebuilding: Reflections on good practices, opportunities 
and challenges  (p. 17), London: WOSCAP, LSE  
Gaskell, J.; Puig, H.; Rieken, J.; Ali, A. and Rigterink, A. (2015) Uses of information and 
communication techn ologies (ICTs) for EU conflict prevention and peacebuilding , London: 
WOSCAP, LSE  
GSMA Intelligence (2019) The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2019 , London: GSMA, 
https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=17ebe22503e597f6e4687365106d6ad6&downl
oad (accessed 2  April 2019)  
Hernandez, K. and Roberts, T. (2018) Leaving No One Behind in a Digital World , Brighton, UK: 
Institute of Development Studies  
Idris, I. (2019) Doing research in fragile contexts , 1444, Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of 
Birmingham  
Internatio nal Telecommunication Union (2018) Measuring the Information Society Report 2018 , 
Geneva Switzerland: International Telecommunication Union, https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -
D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2018/MISR -2018 -Vol-1-E.pdf  (accessed 28 May 2019 ) 
Mancini, F. and O’Reilly, M. (2013) ‘New Technology and the Prevention of Violence and 
Conflict’, Stability: International Journal of Security and Development  2.3 
Maxmen, A. (2019) ‘Can tracking people through phone -call data improve lives?’, Nature  569: 
614, http://doi.org/10.1038/d41586 -019-01679 -5 
Parker, B. (2019, February 5) ‘The New Humanitarian | New UN deal with data mining firm 
Palantir raises protection concerns’, https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news/2019/02/05/un -
palantir -deal-data-mining -protection -concerns -wfp (accessed 29 May 2019)  
Pirlot de Corbion, A. (2019) ‘Why privacy and data protection are key to inclusive 
development’[Text], Bond , blog, 24 May, https://www.bond.org.uk/news/2019/05/why -privacy -
and-data-protection -are-key-to-inclusiv e-development  (accessed 28 May 2019)  10 Privacy International (2019) ‘Development and Humanitarian Sector | Privacy International’, 
https://privacyinternational.org/topics/development -and-humanitarian -sector  (accessed 28 May 
2019)  
Raftree, L. (2019, May 16) ‘ What Should Donors do to Support Responsible Data? - ICTworks’, 
https://www.ictworks.org/donors -support -responsible -data/  (accessed 29 May 2019)  
Rahman, Z.; Verhaert, P. and Nyst, C. (2018) Biometrics in the Humanitarian Sector , The Engine 
Room, Oxfam  
‘Responsible Data - Data Playbook (Beta)’ (2019, May 1), 
https://www.preparecenter.org/content/responsible -data-data-playbook -beta (accessed 29 May 
2019)  
Responsible Data Community (2019) ‘Open Letter to WFP re: Palantir Agreement’, Responsible 
Data , blog, 8 February, https://responsibledata.io/2019/02/08/open -letter -to-wfp-re-palantir -
agreement/  (accessed 29 May 2019)  
Roberts, T. and Marchais, G. (2018) ‘Assessing the role of social media and digital technology in 
violence reporting’, Contemporary R eadings in Law and Social Justice  10.2: 9 –42 
Scharbatke -Church, C. and Patel, A. (2016) Technology for Evaluation in Fragile and Conflict 
Affected States: An Introduction for the Digital Immigrant Evaluator , Working Paper, Fletcher 
School, Medford, MA: Tuf ts University, https://sites.tufts.edu/ihs/technology -for-evaluation -in-
fragile -and-conflict -affected -states -an-introduction -for-the-digital -immigrant -evaluator/  
Souter, D. (2017, May 15) ‘Inside the Information Society: ICTs and post -conflict reconstructi on’, 
https://www.apc.org/en/blog/inside -information -society -icts-and-post-conflict  (accessed 17 May 
2019)  
Souter, D. and Kelly, T. (2014) The role of information and communication technologies in 
postconflict reconstruction , Washington, DC, USA: World Bank  
Souter, D. and Van de Spuy, A. (2019) UNESCO’s Internet universality indicators: a framework 
for assessing Internet development - UNESCO Digital Library , Paris: UNESCO, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000367617  (accessed 17 May 2019)  
Tellidis, I.  and Kappler, S. (2016) ‘Information and communication technologies in peacebuilding: 
Implications, opportunities and challenges’, Cooperation and Conflict  51.1: 75 –93, 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0010836715603752  
The Department for International Development (2 018) DFID Digital Strategy 2018 to 2020: doing 
development in a digital world , The Department for International Development, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dfid -digital -strategy -2018 -to-2020 -doing -
development -in-a-digital -world/dfid -digital -strategy -2018 -to-2020 -doing -development -in-a-digital -
world  (accessed 24 May 2019)  
USAID (2019) Considerations for Using Data Responsibly at USAID , USAID, 
https://www.usaid.gov/responsibledata  (accessed 17 May 2019)  
‘What is Responsible Data?’ (n.d.), https:// responsibledata.io/what -is-responsible -data/  
(accessed 29 May 2019)  11  
Suggested citation  
Faith , B. (2019). Digital Technologies Use in Development Programme Design, Delivery and 
M&E in Fragile and Conflict -Affected Setting . K4D Helpdesk Report.  Brighton,  UK: Institute of 
Development Studies.  
About this report  
This report is based on four days of desk -based research. The K4D research he lpdesk provides rapid syntheses 
of a selection of recent relevant literature and international expert thinking in response  to specific questions  
relating to international development. For any enquiries, contact helpdesk @k4d.info . 
K4D services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations working in international development, led by 
the Institute of Development Studies (IDS), with Education Development Trust, Itad , University of Leeds Nuffield 
Centre for International Health and Development, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), University of 
Birmingham International Development Department (IDD) and the U niversity of Manchester Humanitarian and 
Conflict Response Institute (HCRI).  
This report was prepared for the UK Government’s Department for International 
Development (DFID) and its partners in support of pro -poor programmes. It is licensed for 
non-commerc ial purposes only. K4D cannot be held responsible for errors or any 
consequences arising from the use of information contained in this report. Any views and 
opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of DFID, K4D or any other contributing 
organisa tion. © DFID - Crown copyright 201 9. 
