Digital Technologies for 
Transparency in Public Investment
New Tools to Empower Citizens and Governments
Theodore Kahn    
Alejandro Baron     
Juan Cruz VieyraInstitutions for
Development Sector
Innovation in Citizen 
Services Division
DISCUSSION 
PAPER Nº 
IDB-DP-634
November  2018Digital Technologies for Transparency in 
Public Investment
New Tools to Empower Citizens and Governments
Theodore Kahn    Alejandro Baron     Juan Cruz Vieyra
November 2018   Inter-American Development Bank. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/legalcode) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any non-
commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed. 
Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to 
arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB's name for any purpose other than for attribution, and the use of IDB's logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user and 
is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license. 
Note that the link provided above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. 
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Inter-American Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent. http://www.iadb.org
Copyright ©   2018DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES 
FOR TRANSPARENCY  
IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT
New T ools to Empower Citizens and 
Governments
Theodore Kahn
Alejandro Baron
Juan Cruz VieyraABSTRACT*
Improving infrastructure and basic services is a central task in the region’s growth and 
development agenda. Despite the importance of private sector participation, govern -
ments will continue to play a defining role in planning, financing, executing, and over -
seeing key infrastructure projects and service delivery. This reality puts a premium on the efficient and transparent management of public investment, especially in light of the con
-
siderable technical, administrative, and political challenges and vulnerability to corruption and rent-seeking associated with large public works. The recent spate of corruption scan
-
dals surrounding public procurement and infrastructure projects in the region underscores the urgency of this agenda. The emergence of new digital technologies offers powerful 
tools for governments and citizens in the region to improve the transparency and efficiency 
of public investments. This paper examines the challenges of building transparent pub
-
lic investment management systems, both conceptually and in the specific case of Latin America and the Caribbean, and highlights how a suite of new technological tools can 
improve the implementation of infrastructure projects and public services. The discussion 
is informed by the experience of the Inter-American Development Bank in designing and 
implementing the MapaInversiones platform. The paper concludes with several concrete 
policy recommendations for the region.
JEL Codes: D73, H1, H5, O1, O2, O3, O4, R1, N46 Keywords:  citizen participation, corruption, infrastructure, open government, public invest
-
ment, technology, transparency
* Authors’ information: Theodore Kahn, Adjunct Lecturer and Visiting Scholar at the Johns Hopkins 
University, School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS), tkahn1@jhu.edu;. Alejandro Barón, Con -
sultant at the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and Coordinator of the MapaInversiones ini -
tiative, abar@iadb.org; Juan Cruz Vieyra, Moderinzation of the State Specialist at the IDB and Team 
Leader of the MapaInversiones initiative, juancr@iadb.org.Introduction    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Key Governance Challenges for Public Investment Systems    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
The Role of Information and Transparency in Improving  
Public Investment Management    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
The Wild Card: Technological Innovation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
A Practical Case: MapaInversiones  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
Policy Recommendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 29
References   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33CONTENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
The goal of this paper is to encourage a 
discussion of how new technologies can 
increase the transparency of public invest -
ments in Latin America and the Caribbean 
(LAC) and why such an approach is needed 
to control corruption and improve public 
services and infrastructure in the region. 
It begins by presenting contextual infor -
mation on the links between public invest -
ment, corruption, and growth in LAC. It 
then identifies some of the key governance 
challenges for Public Investment Manage -
ment Systems (PIMS), both conceptually 
and in the specific case of LAC countries, 
and examines how transparency and infor -
mation management can strengthen these 
systems. The following sections address the 
role of technological innovation in enhanc -
ing transparency and efficiency in PIMS and 
analyze a concrete case: the MapaInversio -
nes initiative. The paper concludes with several policy recommendations. 
The LAC region has been experienc
-
ing a growth deceleration in the second decade of the 21st century, which is threat
-
ening the development gains of the early 2000s boom.
1 It is urgent to reverse this 
trend and return the region to a path of 
strong growth. Expanding and improving 
access to and the quality of public goods, 
infrastructure, and public services—from roads, ports, and electricity grids to med -
ical clinics and sanitation systems—is crit -
ical to achieving the faster and sustained 
growth needed to support inclusive devel -
opment in the LAC region. 
As a significant body of literature has 
pointed out, public investment is the main 
funding source for crucial economic and social 
infrastructure.2 Standard economic theory 
holds that because infrastructure and ser -
vices are public goods and produce positive externalities, the private sector will tend to 
undersupply them,
3 leaving the government 
1 The average growth rate in the region dropped 
from 4.0 percent between 2003 and 2011 to 1.4 
percent between 2012 and 2018. Meanwhile, emerging economies in Asia and Europe grew at an annual rate of 6.7 and 4.2 percent, respec
-
tively, between 2012 and 2018. These figures are based on the IMF World Economic Outlook data.
2 Public investment can be carried out by a vari -
ety of actors, including central, regional, and local governments as well as other entities such as state-owned enterprises (SOEs). While this paper does not delve into the specific issues raised by subnational governments and SOEs, the discussion is applicable to public investment by these actors.
3 Pure public goods are non-rivalrous (i.e., one 
person’s consumption of the good does not decrease the opportunity for others to con
-
sume it) and non-excludable (i.e., no one can be prevented from the good, once it is produced). These characteristics depress the private return DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT2responsible for ensuring adequate provision. 
While the trend toward privatization of basic 
services and public–private partnerships 
(PPPs) in recent decades has challenged this 
assumption, public investment still provides 
the lion’s share of resources for basic infra -
structure and services.
On this point, LAC does not fare well. 
Even though the average annual invest -
ment in infrastructure was 3.5 percent of the regional GDP between 2008 and 2017, 
the region’s public investment and infra
-
structure gap is longstanding and well doc -
umented. Coverage of basic transportation 
infrastructure in LAC lags emerging Asian 
and OECD economies,4 and governments 
in LAC still devote fewer resources to pub -
lic investment (relative to GDP) than most 
countries in Asia and Europe (Armendáriz et 
al., 2016). Moreover, public investment as a 
share of total government spending in LAC 
has decreased steadily over the past two 
decades, and public investment tends to be 
the first item cut when reducing expendi -
tures (IDB, 2018b), leading to considerable 
volatility in investment levels. Additionally, PPP investment in the LAC region has expe -
rienced a sharp decline since 2015, just as major corruption scandals emerged, 
according to de Michele, Prats, and Losada 
Revol (2018). As discussed in IMF (2015), 
PPPs present similar management and insti
-
tutional challenges to public investment 
projects, so many of the issues addressed in 
this paper are also relevant to PPPs.
More public investment, however, will 
not necessarily generate an increase in the high-quality infrastructure and services 
needed to drive growth in the region. The 
contribution of public investment projects 
to growth depends critically on their effi
-
ciency—that is, the relationship between the amount of public spending on capi
-
tal goods and the coverage and quality of these goods (and in some cases, ser
-
vices).5 The amount “lost” to inefficiencies 
is often large: Gupta et al. (2014) find that 
the actual public capital stock in low- and 
middle-income countries is around half of 
the amount suggested before adjusting for 
efficiency. As a result, countries with the 
most efficient PIMS get twice the growth 
“bang” for every “buck” invested in com -
parison to their least efficient counter -
parts (IMF, 2015).6 Accordingly, studies FIGURE 1:  PPP INVESTMENTS IN 
COLOMBIA AND PERUBillions of dollars10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Peru Colombia
Source: Public Participation in Infrastructure 
Database, World Bank.
to the production of public goods, leading to underinvestment by the private sector in infra
-
structure and services, such as roads, power grids, education, and health care.
4 On the World Economic Forum’s Global Com -
petitiveness Index, LAC scored 3.3 out of 7 on the infrastructure pillar, a performance on par with Sub-Saharan Africa and well below the lev
-
els of Europe and North America (4.3) and East Asia (4.7).
5 Coverage refers to the physical quantity of eco -
nomic and social infrastructure and is generally measured through quantitative indicators such as schools, hospitals, roads per capita. Quality of infrastructure refers to qualitative aspects of these goods and services, generally based on impressions of users of social and economic infrastructure.
6 PIMS refer to the array of institutions that gov -
ern the various stages of the public invest -
ment lifecycle. Most conceptualizations of PIMS IntroductIon 3that ignore investment efficiency end up 
grossly underestimating the potential for 
productivity of public investments,7 nota -
bly through a larger public investment mul -
tiplier8 (Gupta el al., 2014; IDB, 2018b).
There are many reasons why public 
money spent on investment projects may not generate growth-enhancing public goods, 
but corruption, rent-seeking, and state cap
-
ture are especially harmful for efficiency. Corruption generates waste, scarcity, and 
inflated prices, as well as bottlenecks in proj
-
ect management.9 These outcomes, in turn, 
result in an insufficient quantity and lower quality of public goods and services, hurt
-
ing citizens who rely on them. In light of this, 
strategies to improve PIMS in LAC, includ -
ing greater transparency, reducing corrup -
tion risks, and engaging citizens to enhance accountability, are critical steps in the path 
toward sustained, inclusive growth.
In this regard, there is cause for opti -
mism. Initiatives to reduce corruption 
and enhance transparency in LAC have 
advanced on various fronts, including 
national legislative and institutional reforms, 
community and local projects, civil society 
initiatives, and adherence to international 
transparency and governance standards. 
At the national level, countries through -
out the region have bolstered their legal frameworks and institutional capacity to 
enhance transparency and fight corruption 
over the past two decades. These actions 
have included judicial reforms to ensure the 
independence of prosecutors and bolster 
their technical capacity to investigate cor
-
ruption (Vieyra, 2016). In addition, coun -
tries throughout the region strengthened 
autonomous government audit organiza -
tions charged with oversight of the public sector
10 and expanded access to informa -
tion laws.11 These legal mechanisms have 
provided a critical resource for civil soci -
ety organizations and investigative journal -
ists, playing a crucial but often unheralded role in exposing major corruption episodes in the region (de Michele, 2017).
These national reforms have been fos
-
tered by LAC countries’ adherence to a range of international initiatives to promote trans
-
parency and access to information. Partic -
ipation in these multi-stakeholder schemes not only helps ensure that relevant laws, 
regulations, administrative procedures, and 
implementation processes adhere to rigor
-
ous standards, but also helps lock in com -
mitments to transparency across political cycles. Brazil and Mexico were among the 
eight founding members of the Open Gov
-
ernment Partnership (OGP), which an addi -
tional 17 LAC governments (including three 
subnational ones) have since joined.12 In a 
complementary initiative, nine national and 
identify four key competencies that correspond 
to the following stages: (i) strategic planning and appraisal; (ii) allocation and project selec
-
tion; (iii) project implementation; and (iv) ex post evaluation (Armendáriz et al., 2016; Dabla-Norris et al., 2012; IMF, 2015).
7 Pritchett (2000) made this point in a seminal 
paper that inspired more recent efforts to mea -
sure public investment efficiency.
8 Increasing this multiplier means that the growth 
increase from a given amount of public invest -
ment becomes even greater.
9 Price overruns generated by corruption and 
inefficiencies are passed on to the user.
10 During the 1990s and 2000s, 16 LAC countries 
passed new legislation enhancing the institu -
tional standing and bolstering the competencies of these organizations, which have been crucial to the identification of systemic corruption risks in countries such as Brazil, Chile, and Colombia. However, the effectiveness of these institutions has varied widely, due to institutional design, problems of coordination with other public oversight agencies, and broader political econ
-
omy (see Casas-Zamora and Carter, 2017).
11 Starting in 2002, 18 LAC countries approved 
such legislation, and in cases such as Chile and Mexico, implementation has been supported by the creation of independent agencies to ensure compliance across public agencies and help train officials to apply new norms.
12 Launched in 2011, participation in the OGP 
entails developing detailed plans and targets to enhance transparency, citizen participation, and public sector integrity, using new technologies such as open data platforms.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT4over 20 local and state governments in LAC 
have adopted the International Open Data 
Charter, building on the region’s strong 
commitment to e-government beginning in 
the early 2000s.13 In addition to these cross-
cutting initiatives, countries in the region have ascribed to the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI) and Construc
-
tion Sector Transparency Initiative (CoST), which are particularly relevant for improv
-
ing transparency and governance of pub -
lic investment.14
Has the strong momentum behind 
transparency led to better public investment 
management in LAC? In this all-important area, there has been progress, but there are 
also several pending tasks. On the positive 
side of the ledger, every country in LAC has 
a formal, integrated system for managing 
public investment information across gov
-
ernment agencies (ECLAC, 2014), and many countries in the region have made great 
strides in enhancing budget transparency, 
encouraged by participation in the OGP and 
EITI.
15 As a result of these efforts, the region 
in general fares well on existing (although still limited) cross-country indicators of pub
-
lic investment management institutions. In 
the first major effort to assess PIMS, Bolivia, 
Brazil, Colombia, and Peru (four of the ten 
LAC countries in the sample) ranked in the 
top seven of 71 low- and middle-income 
countries (Dabla-Norris et al., 2012).16 A sub -
sequent study by the IMF (2015), which also constructed an index of public investment 
management institutions based on similar 
pillars, found that LAC had one of the best results of any region. 
At the same time, public investment, 
and especially public works has been at 
the center of the recent corruption scan -
dals in LAC—including the Odebrecht case 
that has engulfed much of the region, as 
well as other high-profile investigations in 
recent years (Casas-Zamora and Carter, 
2017). These episodes dramatically illustrate the inherent corruption risks in large public 
works: the difficulty of estimating the appro -
priate costs of large, one-off projects and the enormous amounts of money involved 
create ample opportunity for rent-seeking.
17
There are considerable data—at both 
the global and regional level—to support the notion that publicly tendered infra
-
structure projects are especially vulner -
able to corruption. According to the UN, 
procurement and public purchases amount 
13 Between 2001 and 2014, all governments in 
LAC created a national e-government system 
to expand the use of digital technologies in the public sector. A recent review by the World Bank found that LAC countries such as Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru ranked in the top ten globally in e-government adoption (World Bank, 2016a).
14 Meanwhile, the CoST project aims to improve 
countries’ information reporting and over -
sight of public procurement cycle. These commitments—which require disclosure of infor
-
mation on contract details, cost, and selection criteria among others—directly address several of the key flashpoints for corruption and ineffi
-
ciency in public investment projects. Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama currently par
-
ticipate in the CoST initiative. See http://infra -
structuretransparency.org/where-we-work/.
15 For example, Brazil, Mexico, and Peru score above 
the OECD average on the Open Budget Index, a cross-country measure of budget transparency, and other countries such as the Dominican Repub
-
lic, Guatemala, Chile, and Costa Rica are well above the global average. However, there is great varia
-
tion among LAC countries. See https:/ /www.inter -
nationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/.
16 As discussed above, the index created by 
Dabla-Norris et al. (2012) consists of four main pillars that correspond to the main phases of the investment project cycle: (i) strategic guidance and appraisal; (ii) project selection and budget
-
ing; (iii) project implementation; and (iv) proj -
ect audit and evaluation. Each of these includes sub-components assessing the existence of appropriate administrative procedures, rules, and practices in each of these areas.
17 The Odebrecht investigation, for example, has 
revealed corruption perpetrated by the firm in 10 LAC countries. It is estimated to have paid US$788 million in bribes across the region to win 100 proj
-
ects, which earned the company as much as US$3.3 billion in profits between 2001 and 2016. See “How the Odebrecht Scandal Has Shaken Latin America”, fDi Intelligence, February 15, 2018. https:/ /www.fdi
-
intelligence.com/Locations/How-the-Odebrecht-scandal-has-shaken-Latin-America.IntroductIon 5to 15–30 percent of GDP in many jurisdic -
tions. An estimated 10 to 25 percent of the 
value of public contracts is lost to corrup -
tion (IDB, 2018a), and transnational com -
panies are more likely to pay bribes in the context of procurement than to avoid taxes 
or influence the judicial system, according 
to the World Economic Forum. In addition, 
the OECD report on International Bribery 
indicates that 57 percent of cases brought 
under the Convention to Combat the Brib
-
ery of Foreign Public Servants in Interna -
tional Business Transactions involve bribes 
to lock in public contracts. 
In the case of LAC, there is also evi -
dence that the region’s public investment systems remain prone to corruption and 
mismanagement. According to World Bank 
enterprise surveys, LAC firms pay more than twice the amount in bribes to public 
officials for contracts than their counter
-
parts in OECD countries; in some coun -
tries, such as Mexico, the gap is as much 
as nine times higher.18 In addition, 17 per -
cent of firms in the region believe that it is expected to give gifts or payments in 
exchange for public contracts. The expec
-
tation of payment in the context of public procurement, moreover, is significantly 
more common19 than for other interactions 
with the government.20
While public investment efficiency and 
corruption risks pose considerable chal -
lenges for the region, a new type of solu -
tion is already on the table. Innovations in information and communication tech
-
nologies (ICT) are showing great poten -
tial to increase the transparency, oversight, and efficiency of public resources in the 
region. Applications of digital technology 
include open data initiatives, the use of big 
data and data mining to enhance public 
investment management, and social media FIGURE 2: WHERE DOES BRIBERY OCCUR?
Public
procurement 57%
Customs
clearance
12%Other
preferential
treatments
7% Favorable
ﬁscal
treatment
6%Licenses/
authorizations
6%Access to
conﬁdential
information
4%Undetermined
7%Working
visas
1%
Source: OECD (2016b). 
18 See http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/.
19 By comparison, 12 percent of firms expected 
to give gifts to secure a construction permit, 10 
percent to receive an operating license, and 5 percent to obtain an electrical connection.
20 LAC scored below East Asia, Europe and 
North America, Eurasia, the Middle East, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa on indi
-
cators of diversion of public funds, favorit -
ism in the decisions of government officials, and efficiency of public spending metrics on the 2017-2018 Global Competitiveness Index. The indicators are based an executive opin
-
ion survey. See http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-index-2017-2018/.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT6platforms to encourage citizen participa -
tion in the public investment cycle. These 
new tools build on and complement exist -
ing anti-corruption efforts in the region, such as the strengthening of judicial sys
-
tems and auditing institutions; adhesion to international transparency standards; and 
access to information laws.
These new and powerful technologi -
cal tools clearly have the potential to trans -
form transparency and anti-corruption 
initiatives. However, their rapid emergence 
presents a set of important questions. 
What are the preconditions to effectively 
put in practice technological innovations to 
enhance transparency in public investment 
systems? What are the channels through 
which new technologies can bolster these 
effects? What are the key lessons learned 
during the implementation of technolog -
ical innovations in this field? These are some of the key issues that motivated this 
paper. The main inspiration has been the implementation of the MapaInversiones 
initiative, an Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB) project that leverages geore
-
ferenced maps and data visualizations to 
enhance transparency and monitoring of 
public investment projects in the region, 
an example of the potential of technology-
based initiatives to improve public invest -
ment management. 
The next section goes into more detail 
on the specific governance challenges facing public investment management. 
Section three discusses the role of trans
-
parency and information management in strengthening PIMS. Section four examines 
the potential of technological innovation 
for achieving greater efficiency and trans
-
parency, and section five presents the con -
crete case of the MapaInversiones initiative. The concluding section provides policy rec
-
ommendations for improving the transpar -
ency of public investments in LAC through technological solutions.
dIGIt AL tE cHno LoGIES F or tr AnSPA rEncY In PuBLI c InVES tMEnt: 67
KEY GOVERNANCE CHALLENGES FOR 
PUBLIC INVESTMENT SYSTEMS
The prevalence and magnitude of ineffi -
ciencies in public projects point to the chal -
lenges governments face in implementing 
them, especially for large infrastructure 
projects.21 Public investments carried out 
in the context of weak institutions tend to be inefficient and often fail to produce sus
-
tained growth. In a study of major public 
investment between 1960 and 2011, War -
ner (2014) concludes that large increases in public investment yield at best a tem
-
porary increase in growth due to poor (or non-existent) project evaluation, the lack of 
basic information on project impacts, rent-
seeking by public and private actors, and 
political pressure to continue spending on 
flawed projects.
Weak institutions and corruption risks 
also increase the price tag of public invest
-
ment and service provision by imposing a higher cost of capital on governments and 
generating more overhead in public sector 
agencies (Coolidge and Rose-Ackerman, 
1997; Dal Bo and Rossi, 2007).
22 Accord -
ingly, greater public expenditure is required 
to produce a given level of infrastructure 
or service provision, thus depressing effi -
ciency. Keefer and Knack (2002; 2007) 
echo these results by finding that in coun -
tries with poorer governance, a given amount of investment improves the qual -
ity of infrastructure less than in countries 
with stronger institutions.23 Taking this into 
account, some salient challenges for public 
investment efficiency are as follows:
• Project management is often complex. 
These projects are usually technically 
demanding, they involve multiple stages 
and intense coordination among different 
actors, and they require long time hori -
zons across different administrations. As 
a result, real-time management, monitor -
21 The discussion about major works in this sec -
tion focuses mainly on large public works such 
as roads, ports, communication and energy grids, but also on other sectors such as edu
-
cation, health, and other public services that require the construction of physical infrastruc
-
ture, such as schools and hospitals, as part of service delivery.
22 Overhead consists of the operating costs of 
public entities that carry out investments. In a study of 80 public utilities in 13 Latin Amer
-
ican countries, Dal Bo and Rossi (2007) show, for example, that higher levels of corruption are associated with more employees per output (i.e., lower labor productivity) and higher main
-
tenance costs.
23 In contrast to the studies discussed below, 
these papers look at the effect of countries’ overall governance environment and political institutions, rather than specific institutions and procedures for managing public investment.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT8ing, and oversight of project implemen -
tation are inherently difficult (Flyvbjerg, 
2009). These features mean that public 
sector capacity to manage public invest -
ment projects is often limited.
• Information asymmetries abound. The 
underlying information asymmetry 
between public and private actors, as well 
as fragmentation and information gaps 
within different state agencies, create 
ample opportunities to inflate contracts 
and distribute the resulting rents, leading 
to rent-seeking and corruption. Moreover, the one-off nature of large public works 
means that public sector decision makers cannot easily assess costs and benefits 
based on comparisons with prior projects (Rose-Ackerman, 1975). Moreover, Collier 
and Venables (2008) argue that insuffi
-
cient information and technical capac -
ity for ex ante project evaluation, as well 
as the prevalence of rent-seeking, lowers the development impact of public invest
-
ment in low-income countries.
• Control and oversight are crucial. 
These risks are exacerbated when insti -
tutional controls such as effective over -
sight bodies as well as checks and balances within the public sector and 
competitive bidding processes are 
absent or weak. A lack of effective mon
-
itoring by citizens and civil society fur -
ther undermines oversight and control. Countries with higher levels of corrup
-
tion and weaker governance institutions tend to spend more on public invest
-
ment after controlling for other vari -
ables (Keefer and Knack 2002, 2007; Tanzi and Davoodi 1997) and less on 
other goods such as education (Mauro, 
1998), increasing the amount of public 
resources subject to rent-seeking and 
capture by private interests.
• Politics matter.  Politics can also inter
-
fere with efficient public investment management. Project selection may respond more to the goal of shoring up 
political support rather than promot
-
ing economic efficiency (Robinson and 
Torvik, 2005). Moreover, major projects, 
once begun, can be politically difficult 
to stop or alter, even when technical cri -
teria indicate the need to do so. These dynamics are exacerbated by the mis
-
match between project lifecycles and electoral calendars: while the dividends 
of projects in developing countries 
often take decades to fully emerge, 
political terms usually last from four to 
six years (Arslanalp et al., 2010). Simi
-
larly, Gupta et al. (2016) find that levels 
of public investment vary in response 
to electoral cycles, a practice that is at 
odds with rational investment planning. 
Public Investment 
Management in Latin 
America and the Caribbean
The current state of public investment man -
agement institutions in LAC reflects these 
issues. Despite progress in recent years, 
there are several pending tasks in strength -
ening the region’s PIMS. A recent review 
by ECLAC (2014) concludes that PIMS in 
the LAC region present weaknesses when 
it comes to strategic planning and ex ante 
project evaluation, auditing and ex post 
evaluation, and access to information and 
mechanisms for citizen participation. 
Methodologies and technical capac -
ity to perform rigorous (i.e., ex ante and ex 
post) project evaluations are limited.24 Most 
countries also fail to incorporate citizens’ 
24 For example, Chile was the only country in the 
sample of six LAC countries that performed short 
and medium-term evaluations based on project costs, timeframes, magnitudes, and operation and maintenance costs. Similarly, while China had 37 methodologies for ex ante evaluation of different types of projects, other countries employ a one-size-fits-all methodology.KEY GoVE rnAncE cHALLE nGES F or Pu BLI c In VES tMEnt S YStEMS 9views into their evaluation of investment 
projects, a potential valuable source of 
input for improving the capacity to man -
age projects. Moreover, while information 
portals on public investment projects exist 
across the region, these tools are hampered 
by incomplete information; the absence of 
standardized, best-practice formats for 
easy citizen use; and failure to incorpo -
rate advanced technology (e.g., cloud com -
puting, open data platforms). Finally, the study found that project monitoring is pri
-
marily financial rather than physical, mean -
ing that it is concerned with regular, timely execution of budget funds assigned to the 
project rather than actual progress on the public work in question.
A more recent survey sheds further 
light on the state of PIMS in the region. Armendáriz et al. (2016) construct an index 
of public investment institutions in LAC that 
covers the four stages of the public invest
-
ment cycle assessed in Dabla-Norris et al. 
(2012) but also includes an additional, “gen -
eral characteristics” pillar to capture cross-cutting features of countries’ PIMS. This 
pillar consists of the strength of legislative 
frameworks, the technical capacity of pub
-
lic sector personnel, transparency and pub -
lic scrutiny, and support systems for public investment institutions.
25 These features 
allow for a more accurate portrayal of the 
de facto functioning of a country’s PIMS, 
which may diverge from its de jure institu -
tional and administrative framework.26
The results of this exercise are revealing. 
First, similar to ECLAC (2014), the authors 
find that LAC countries on the whole exhibit 
poorer performance in strategic planning and guidance and ex post evaluation and 
auditing, while project selection and imple
-
mentation are relatively strong. Specifically, 
methodologies for project preparation and 
ex ante evaluation, social precautions, and 
the selection of projects on technical cri -
teria show weaknesses. Also, the “general characteristics” pillar suggests that coun -
tries’ performance on these cross-cutting pillars lags the overall institutional develop
-
ment of PIMS.27 Closer scrutiny reveals that 
the lower scores are driven by the access 
to information/public scrutiny and support 
systems components. The authors con -
clude that information systems in public investment tend to be centralized and not 
user-friendly.
28
This result is echoed by ECLAC (2014), 
which argues for the use of technologies such as cloud computing, open data for
-
mats, and social networks to manage and 
disseminate data and encourage citizen 
participation. Along these lines, a recent analysis of public sector support for open 
government and open data in the region found that despite strong momentum, 
there are still considerable gaps in imple
-
mentation and engagement with end users 
25 This index is based on both a survey of high-
level officials responsible for public investment 
management and secondary sources, whereas previous indices such as that developed by Dabla-Norris et al. (2012) drew mainly on sec
-
ondary sources.
26 Dabla-Norris et al. acknowledge that their 
index may provide a better picture of the de jure features of PIMS more than how systems work in practice (2012: 243–44).
27 The general characteristics component is not 
strongly correlated with other phases of the PIMS, which means the inclusion of these mea
-
sures adds new information to the index and underscores that countries can advance on the formal institutional side despite lingering weak
-
nesses in cross-cutting functions. For example, Chile, one of the highest-ranked countries on the overall index, scores below the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and Honduras on general characteristics. Some countries such as Argen
-
tina improve their performance once the gen -
eral characteristics component is included in the index.
28 These findings are similar to those of the 
Open Budget Index, a measure of transparency of countries’ broader budget frameworks. The region generally scores well on variables measur
-
ing the quantity of information made public but registers much weaker performance on encour
-
aging citizen participation. See https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT10(OECD, 2016a). While a large majority (77 
percent) of LAC countries surveyed had 
an open data portal at the national level, 
only half included a user feedback sec -
tion and only 53 percent carried out reg -
ular consultations with end users. The lack of mechanisms to coordinate with civil soci
-
ety and the private sector was identified as the most important challenge to success
-
ful implementation of open government in the region. In addition, only two countries 
held regular training for public officials in 
the analysis of open data systems.
In sum, the balance of evidence in these 
studies points to a divide between the for
-
mal, de jure institutional and administra -
tive features of the region’s PIMS and their de facto operation. This characterization 
seems to apply also to the specific issue 
of transparency of public investment pro
-
cesses, which exists formally in most coun -
tries but could and should have a greater positive impact on efficiency. Given this 
scenario, there is a need for specific inter
-
ventions and tools to improve the qual -
ity and quantity of information flows both 
within the public sector and between public agencies and citizens, as well as steps to 
ensure that stakeholders are analyzing 
the information in an effective and timely manner. This implies putting forward spe
-
cific efforts to engage with area experts in civil society, academia, and other interest 
groups. 
As examined in more detail below, 
the adoption and effective use of cutting-
edge technologies is critical to the success 
of any such strategy. Such initiatives build 
on governments’ efforts and commitment to enhance transparency and efficiency 
in public investments and offer a practi
-
cal entry point for citizens and civil soci -
ety groups to engage with public entities to 
help improve public services and infrastruc -
ture. Advancing on this front is fundamen -
tal to reversing the troubling deterioration in trust in government in LAC caused by 
worsening perceptions of corruption. The 
next section analyzes the mechanisms 
through which transparency and infor
-
mation management can enhance public 
investment efficiency, setting the stage for 
the discussion of the application of digital 
technologies in this area.11
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND 
TRANSPARENCY IN IMPROVING PUBLIC INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT
To design effective, targeted interven -
tions, it is important to identify and explore 
the various pathways leading from stron -
ger PIMS to better public investment out -
comes. In general, there are two broad and complementary channels to bring about 
greater public investment efficiency. First, 
stronger public investment systems can 
increase the incentives  to manage pub
-
lic investments efficiently by bolstering 
accountability mechanisms both horizon -
tally (i.e., among public officials, executing agencies, and control institutions), and ver
-
tically (i.e., from citizens, journalists, civil society groups, etc.). This channel empha
-
sizes how effective monitoring and over -
sight can alter the costs and benefits of inefficient or corrupt practices. The second 
channel to realize efficiency gains has to do 
with the capacity  of officials across various 
public agencies to plan, select, implement, monitor, and evaluate these complex, multi-
stage projects. This channel assumes that 
there are public sector actors who intend to carry out projects based on rational criteria 
but who may lack the technical expertise, 
relevant information, technological tools, or 
proper administrative procedures to do so.Improving Information 
Management and 
Transparency: How to  Make 
the Most of PIMS 
Information management and transpar -
ency are central to the activity of PIMS 
and critical to activating the two channels 
discussed above.29 The IMF has identified 
transparency in PIMS as a critical aspect to strengthen the public investment cycle. 
Meanwhile, a recent review of public sector 
management in LAC by ECLAC (2014) also 
pointed to the importance of transparency 
in PIMS to disseminate information with cit
-
izens. To see why, it is useful to explore the 
29 Information management refers to the capac -
ity to generate, organize, and analyze relevant 
data as well as ensure its efficient flow across relevant entities and actors within an organiza
-
tion (in this case the public sector). Transpar -
ency, by contrast, involves the open publication of information about the operations of public sector agencies to outside actors, including cit
-
izens, civil society groups, government auditing institutions, and other public entities charged with monitoring and oversight. As discussed below, transparency requires that information be published so that it enhances these actors’ understanding of government activities.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT12various components of PIMS, which corre -
spond to the stages of public investment:30 
• Strategic planning and appraisal. This 
phase consists of designing a portfo -
lio of investment projects aligned with a country’s development objectives 
but within its budgetary restrictions. 
Effective planning requires techni
-
cally sound, transparent, ex ante eval-
uation of the costs and benefits of the projects, based on standardized meth
-
odologies.31 Appraisals can be con -
ducted inhouse or by outside experts to combat “optimism bias” in planning 
(Rajaram et al., 2014). Some analyses include fiscal rules, binding policymak
-
ers to sustainable levels of investment 
spending over a project’s multi-year life 
cycle, as important tools for strategic 
planning (IMF, 2015).
• Allocation and project selection. Once projects have been identified and 
appraised, officials must choose which 
projects to pursue and how to finance 
them. Effective project selection and 
budgeting involves managing a portfolio 
of potential projects and assessing their 
feasibility in light of current fiscal condi
-
tions. This stage of the cycle also requires a clear and transparent project selection 
and budgeting process, based on techni
-
cal criteria and backed up by appropriate 
institutional checks and controls, as well 
as public disclosure to enhance transpar -
ency over the process (Dabla-Norris et 
al., 2012; Rajaram et al., 2014).32
• Project implementation.  This phase 
entails several processes. First, an effi -
cient allocation of resources demands competitive and transparent bidding 
and procurement. Additionally, real-time 
reporting on the physical and financial 
status of projects during construction 
and operation is crucial (Dabla-Norris et 
al., 2012; Flyvbjerg, 2009).
33• Ex post evaluation. Finally, PIMS must 
allow this evaluation, including in-house 
and external audits. However, audit -
ing and evaluating are difficult without 
information on the economic and social 
impacts of the project. The results of 
these exercises should be made public 
to shed light on the impact of public 
investments and thus bolster account -
ability.34 Sound evaluation and auditing 
of existing projects generate valuable 
information to inform the planning and 
appraisal of future projects, thus boost -
ing public sector capacity for efficient management (IMF, 2015). 
At each of these stages of the public 
investment cycle, information management 
and transparency can play a central role 
in activating the two channels—increasing 
capacity and generating incentives—for 
improving efficiency through stronger PIMS. 
Better information management within the 
public sector enhances the capacity of offi -
cials to administer complex public works 
30 The four stages discussed here were identi -
fied in Dabla-Norris (2012), the first compara -
ble, cross-country index of public investment 
management. Subsequent work by Gupta et al. (2014), IMF (2015), and Armendáriz et al. (2016) adhere closely to this approach.
31 Ideally, public agencies should develop tai -
lored methodologies for evaluating different types of projects (ECLAC, 2014).
32 For example, the Dabla-Norris et al. (2012) 
index identifies multi-year forecasts linked to annual budget policies that consider recurrent project expenditures; formal review processes for project selection; and public access to infor
-
mation on these procedures, as important fea -
tures of the selection and budgeting phase, among others.
33 The project implementation component there -
fore includes indicators on whether procedures for awarding contracts are competitive, as well as the existence and operation of a procurement com
-
plaints mechanisms, and of internal audit controls in executing ministries (Dabla-Norris et al., 2012).
34 The mechanisms linking information dissemi -
nation, transparency, and accountability are dis -
cussed in detail below.tHE r oLE o F In ForMA tIon A nd t rAnSPA rEncY In IMProVI nG Pu BLI c In VES tMEnt M AnAGEME nt 13effectively and efficiently. In addition, 
greater transparency in the public invest -
ment cycle encourages monitoring and over -
sight, strengthening incentives for efficient management. While conceptually distinct, 
the two channels are highly complementary, 
as the discussion below highlights. 
With respect to information manage -
ment, it is clear that high-quality, reliable technical information is a critical input for 
efficient, rational public investment manage
-
ment across various stages. Rigorous project 
appraisal depends on the existence of infor -
mation on past project performance, gener -
ated either by the public sector itself or by 
external evaluators, which is readily available 
to decision makers. Next, effective project 
selection depends on a variety of informa -
tional inputs, which demand a timely flow of 
updated information between public entities 
responsible for budgets and planning, envi -
ronmental and social impacts, and frontline 
executing agencies. At the implementation 
phase, officials in different parts of the public 
sector need access to quality, real-time infor -
mation on the physical and financial status of projects to effectively oversee them, respond 
to operational issues, and ensure timely 
financial disbursements. Here again, timely, 
reliable, and secure information flows across 
different public entities are crucial. Finally, 
auditing and ex post evaluation are naturally 
impossible without accurate information on project costs, technical characteristics, and 
economic and social impacts. All these func
-
tions entail considerable demand for effec -
tive information management and analysis 
across different public sector entities, levels 
of government, and electoral cycles. 
Transparency to Enhance 
Monitoring and Oversight 
In addition to improving the capacity to 
manage public investment, disseminating information on the public investment cycle 
can increase the incentives for efficient 
management through greater monitor -
ing by actors within and outside of govern -
ment. Monitoring can increase the likelihood that corruption or mismanagement will be 
exposed and punished,
35 thus raising its costs 
and potentially reducing its occurrence.36
Actors within the public sector (hor -
izontal accountability), such as govern -
ment audit institutions, and planning and/
or oversight departments within line min -
istries, can perform effective monitoring. Monitoring by citizens (vertical accountabil
-
ity), who directly benefit from public invest -
ments, can potentially be more effective.37 
In most cases, horizontal and vertical mon -
itoring are complementary: government oversight and auditing represent an impor
-
tant source of information to be shared with the public, while citizen monitoring 
can provide valuable inputs for public sec
-
tor watchdogs (Fox, 2015; Joshi, 2014).
Feedback from end users (citizens) on 
the quality of public services and infrastruc -
ture can also be very useful. Such informa -
tion provides important input into different 
stages of public investment management. 
Perceptions of citizens and/or civil society 
stakeholders on the quality of infrastruc -
ture and services, for example, can inform project evaluation. Feedback can also take 
the form of citizen participation in formu
-
lating priorities for future investment plan -
ning. There are growing opportunities to 
35 Punishment can take various forms including 
formal criminal penalties, career damage, social 
sanction, or being voted out of office in the case of elected officials (Joshi, 2014; Olken, 2007).
36 The conceptualization of corruption as func -
tion of the relative costs and benefits of com -
mitting corrupt acts derives from Becker and Stigler’s (1974) rational choice models of crime. See also Rose-Ackerman (1978) and Klitgaard (1988) for a similar view.
37 See O’Donnell (1993) and Mainwaring and 
Welna (2003) on horizontal versus vertical accountability.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT14design transparency tools in such a way to 
encourage user feedback, thus enhancing 
their potential impact.
Thus, initiatives to increase the trans -
parency of public investment management 
have great potential to improve efficiency, 
especially given the complexity of public 
investment projects. The provision of infor -
mation at each stage of the investment cycle allows for stronger monitoring and 
control over public investments and ser
-
vice delivery: (i) the disclosure and publi -
cation of the methodologies, procedures, 
and results of project appraisals facilitate 
review and validation by outside stakehold -
ers, helping identify areas of weakness and 
corruption risks; (ii) greater transparency 
in project selection and budgeting also 
encourages citizen oversight of these pro -
cesses; (iii) at the implementation stage, competitive, open tenders can expand the 
potential population of firms competing for 
contracts, directly improving efficiency; 
and (iv) the publication of the results of ex 
post project evaluation is critical for both 
citizens and public sector watchdogs. 
Making Transparency Work: 
How to Disclose Information
Numerous studies show that openly pub -
lishing information about public investment 
and services can bring major efficiency 
gains, underscoring the importance of 
these dynamics.38 However, the balance of 
research in this area shows that information 
provision per se is generally not enough, all 
other factors being equal, to trigger effec -
tive citizen monitoring (Fox, 2015; Lieber -
man, Posner, and Tsai, 2014). In general, there are two critical links in the chain 
between transparency and better pub
-
lic sector outcomes: (i) citizen action, or 
the actual use of information for effective 
monitoring; and (ii) government response, consisting of changes in the public sector 
to improve performance.39
On the first point, there is no guarantee 
that the provision of information by the pub -
lic sector will be used productively. To cata -
lyze effective monitoring and accountability, information needs to have certain charac
-
teristics and to be disseminated in such a way that it actually enhances understand
-
ing of how the public sector is operating and encourages different types of poten
-
tial users to interact with it.40 Accordingly, 
the literature on the impact of transparency 
initiatives clearly indicates that information 
disseminated by public agencies should 
have the following characteristics: 
• Quality and timeliness: There is poten -
tially wide variation in the quality of infor -
mation. If information is not accurate, 
complete, up to date, and specific, it will 
not be amenable to analysis that allows 
users to assess the performance of public 
services and investments (Fung, Graham, 
and Weil, 2008; Joshi, 2014).
• Credibility:  If potential users do not 
view the information produced and 
published by government agencies, 
their incentives to engage with the 
information and incorporate it into 
monitoring efforts will be limited. In this 
regard, efforts to ensure the credibility 
of the data, such as external validation or inputs by civil society, can enhance 
the effects of transparency initiatives.
38 See, for example, studies by Bjorkman and 
Svennson (2009), Olken (2007; 2009), and 
Reinikka and Svensson (2005).
39 This conceptual discussion applies equally to 
horizontal monitoring by actors within the pub -
lic sector, in addition to vertical by citizens. In the former case, the characteristics of informa
-
tion necessary to encourage monitoring may differ given the more specialized nature of the users. See below for further discussion.
40 As discussed below, Fung, Graham, and Weil 
(2008) describe transparency initiatives with these characteristics as “targeted transparency.”tHE r oLE o F In ForMA tIon A nd t rAnSPA rEncY In IMProVI nG Pu BLI c In VES tMEnt M AnAGEME nt 15• Ease of understanding and relevance: 
Information must be formatted and 
presented to end users in a way that 
is comprehensible and relevant to 
their concerns. In this regard, more is 
not necessarily better. An overload of 
highly technical information on public 
works projects is unlikely to help citi -
zens better understand public sector performance. By contrast, targeted 
indicators of the physical progress and 
financial status of projects, set against 
initial goals, can facilitate effective 
monitoring (Fung, Graham, and Weil, 
2008). Here, it is important to highlight 
that the standard of understandabil
-
ity and relevance will vary for different classes of users. Specialized audiences 
can have greater technical capacity to 
interact with more complex data (and 
may demand a greater degree of com
-
plexity and nuance to use information 
effectively).41 For non-specialists, the 
publication of information via intuitive, 
comparable performance indicators 
may be necessary to facilitate citizen 
monitoring. This demands prior analy -
sis and aggregation of raw data.
• Comparability:  Providing information 
that facilitates relevant comparisons, 
for example among different jurisdic -
tions and groups of users, can be an important impetus for collective action. 
If citizens in one jurisdiction see that 
they receive lower quality public ser
-
vices than their neighbors, they may be more likely to demand improvements 
than if their level of service is presented 
without relevant context (Joshi, 2014).
• Ability to share and disseminate: Shar -
ing information among different stake -
holders is critical to several of the steps linking transparency to better public 
investment management. Sharing infor
-
mation can scale up monitoring efforts, 
thus strengthening incentives for public officials to reduce corruption, improve 
efficiency, and enhance the power of cit -
izens to demand better results from the 
public sector.
It is important to highlight that pub -
lic entities on the front lines of investment projects and service delivery must have 
strong systems for collecting, managing, 
and reporting information on their opera
-
tions to produce data with the characteris -
tics discussed above. In addition, agencies responsible for budget management need 
real-time tools to monitor and report dis
-
bursements and outlays to different proj -
ects to ensure the quality of information 
on projects’ financial status. These consid -
erations once again point to the close links between better information management 
within the public sector and greater trans
-
parency via the dissemination of high-qual -
ity information to citizens and government 
oversight agencies. Solid information man -
agement by governments is a key prereq -
uisite for effective transparency initiatives.
From Transparency to 
Accountability
Even if effective monitoring occurs, the 
question of whether and how public sec -
tor actors respond to evidence of corrup -
tion, inefficiencies, or poor performance remains.
42 The range of possible state 
41 The policy implication is that initiatives to 
enhance transparency should be designed with 
the needs of different types of users in mind.
42 The nature of the government response is cen -
tral to the concept of accountability, which gen -
erally includes the component of answerability or the effective right of citizens to receive infor
-
mation or explanations for government actions, as well as enforceability, or the ability of citizens to pursue effective sanctions if government actions do not meet legal or administrative stan
-
dards or contravene formal or informal norms. See World Bank (2004).DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT16reactions includes sanctioning offend -
ing officials as well as deeper and more 
systematic responses such as reforming 
processes (e.g., instituting competitive bid -
ding), changing administrative structures, 
advocating for reforms at higher levels of 
government, or mobilizing more resources 
to improve service provision or investment 
performance.43 In addition to such “posi -
tive responses,” it is also possible that mon -
itoring efforts will be met with negative 
responses such as reprisals, intimidation, or 
even violence (Fox, 2015). 
That said, the revelation of corruption 
or mismanagement may not bring about an 
effective institutional response. There are 
various reasons why the discovery of cor -
ruption risks or inefficiencies in PIMS may 
not produce the desired response from the 
government. First, public officials will have 
no incentive to improve performance if 
there is no credible threat of sanctions or 
pressure to improve performance. Second, 
actors in the public sector may have every 
intention to redress the issues raised by cit -
izen monitoring but may lack the capac -
ity to do so. This point further underscores the complementarity between efforts to 
improve information management within 
the public sector and transparency initia
-
tives to encourage effective monitoring, since the former set of interventions can 
strengthen the latter.
44
In such cases, citizens, civil society 
stakeholders, and/or reform advocates within government need to pursue addi
-
tional actions to bring about increased 
efficiency, such as pursuing legal and 
administrative channels to pressure public 
agencies, organizing protests, and/or vot -
ing against corrupt officials (Joshi, 2014).45 This requires sustained collective action 
and relies on a broader institutional envi -
ronment conducive to expression of citi -
zens’ demands.46 Transparency initiatives 
are increasingly leveraging new technolo -
gies to nurture this type of broader, collec -
tive citizen response.
Finally, in some cases, the mere like -
lihood of greater monitoring (either hori -
zontal or vertical) spurs public officials to 
take steps to increase efficiency.47 This is 
called the monitoring effect. As Reinnika 
and Svennson conclude from a seminal 
study on information provision in Uganda, 
greater transparency can lead officials “to 
rationally believe the threat of punishment 
increased,” causing them to reduce corrupt 
behavior (2011: 959). Still, in light of this 
discussion, transparency and information 
management initiatives should be designed 
to facilitate effective monitoring (horizon -
tal and vertical) and encourage a positive 
response by public sector actors. As the 
next section shows, an array of new tech -
nologies can be leveraged to this end.
43 As Joshi (2014) points out, the government 
response may also take the form of further infor -
mation disclosure, providing an important posi -
tive feedback mechanism.
44 See Joshi (2014) on how successful monitor -
ing can encourage further monitoring efforts, 
including in neighboring jurisdictions.
45 See Ferraz and Finan (2008) for evidence on 
how information dissemination can enhance accountability via the ballot box.
46 The ability of citizens to express their pref -
erences and thus influence the actions of the government is generally referred to as “voice” (World Bank, 2004: 79), following the seminal characterization of A. O. Hirschman.
47 See Lagunes (2017) for experimental evidence 
of the prospect of monitoring leading to greater efficiency in Peru.17
THE WILD CARD: TECHNOLOGICAL 
INNOVATION 
The way in which information management 
and transparency initiatives are imple -
mented is critical to activating the various channels through which information can 
improve public sector efficiency. The rapid 
advance of ICTs, including digital technol
-
ogies, mobile applications, big data, block -
chain, cloud computing, and many others, has greatly expanded the toolkit for imple
-
menting effective transparency and infor -
mation management reforms. 
These technologies have enormous 
potential to improve public investment man -
agement and, in so doing, increase the eco -
nomic dividends from investment projects. The following examples show how technol
-
ogy can be used to strengthen the channels linking information to efficiency discussed 
above: internal information management, 
horizontal monitoring, vertical monitor
-
ing, user feedback, and citizen voice. They are meant to be illustrative of the poten
-
tial applications of new technologies to this area, but are by no means exhaustive.
Effective, in-depth public sector oversight: New ICTs can also enhance the capacity 
of oversight agencies and departments in 
the public sector to identify and control 
inefficiencies and corruption risks in the public investment cycle. Blockchain tech
-
nology, for example, can ensure that each 
step in the procurement process is tracked, 
recorded, and secured on an unalterable 
platform. Blockchain thus creates an incor -
ruptible “digital ledger” that can offer an invaluable tool to public sector auditors. 
In addition, advances in data analysis 
techniques are rapidly expanding the tools 
available to auditors and oversight agen
-
cies. Data mining, which employs advanced 
statistical analysis and machine learning, 
can analyze databases that are orders of 
magnitude larger than traditional data (so-
called big data), identifying patterns and, 
increasingly, generating predictions. These 
tools allow public sector auditors to subject 
massive numbers of transactions to sys -
tematic scrutiny and, potentially, identify corruption risks in real time. Brazil’s Obser
-
vatory of Public Spending, a unit within the country’s Office of the Comptroller General, 
has implemented data mining tools that 
allow officials to audit around US$5 trillion 
of public spending. In 2015 alone, the unit 
raised red flags in more than 7,500 cases, 
amounting to contracts worth US$104 mil
-
lion (Moreno, 2017).
By increasing the reliability, quality, and 
timeliness of information at the disposal of DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT18comptrollers and other government watch -
dogs—as well as exponentially enhancing 
their capacity to analyze this information—
these technologies have great potential 
to bolster horizontal accountability in the 
public sector.
Targeted transparency:  Fung, Graham, and 
Weil (2008) introduced the concept of tar -
geted transparency. In a nutshell, targeted 
transparency consists of the disclosure of 
information in a way that allows consum -
ers and users of public services to better 
understand and evaluate the performance 
of firms and government agencies and make better decisions based on this infor
-
mation.48 To bring about sustained, positive 
change in information users and disclos -
ers, however, the information must: (i) have 
perceived value to users to advance their 
goals; (ii) be compatible with users’ deci -
sion-making routines; and (iii) be compre -
hensible to them.
Technological tools such as interac -
tive web platforms, mobile apps, and data 
visualizations can ensure that the informa -
tion provided by public agencies reaches citizens in an intuitive, user-friendly for
-
mat. An example of this is geo-referenced maps, which use GPS technologies to show 
the geographic location of public invest
-
ment projects. These maps allow users to 
identify how resources are being spent in 
their jurisdiction and make comparisons 
with neighboring locales. In addition, the 
implementation of these tools requires 
coordination across government entities to aggregate and harmonize different sources 
of data, helping strengthen capacity for 
information management. The combina
-
tion of incentives for more vigorous citizen monitoring and better management and 
oversight of data can have a notable impact 
on efficiency. In Peru, increased monitoring 
of projects through INFOBRAS, a web por
-
tal with data on over 70,000 public works hosted by the country’s Office of the Comp -
troller General, decreased project costs by 
half (Lagunes, 2017). Meanwhile, the imple -
mentation of the MapaRegalías platform in Colombia significantly increased comple
-
tion in those projects included in the plat -
form (see Section V).
A particular application of targeted 
transparency in this field is electronic pro -
curement, or e-procurement. E-procure -
ment systems publish online all the details, relevant technical information, and out
-
comes of public sector tender processes and, in some cases, allow firms to bid 
directly through the same web portal.
49 
These systems facilitate horizontal and ver -
tical monitoring of procurement processes 
while expanding the population of poten -
tial bidders, leading to greater competi -
tion and helping break up bidding cartels;50 
finally, e-procurement systems that allow 
for online bidding help eliminate corruption 
48 The authors define the concept fully as fol -
lows: “Targeted transparency offers a more 
focused approach often used to introduce new scientific evidence of public risks into market choices. Government compels companies or agencies to disclose information in standardized formats to reduce specific risks, to ameliorate externalities arising from a failure of consumers or producers to fully consider social costs asso
-
ciated with a product, or to improve provision of public goods and services. Such policies are more light-handed than conventional regulation, relying on the power of information rather than on enforcement of rules and standards or finan
-
cial inducements.”
49 Publishing information on tendering opportu -
nities is referred to as informational e-procure -
ment, while the ability to submit bids online is known as transactional e-procurement (World Bank, 2016b). E-procurement falls into the cat
-
egory of e-government, which includes a wide range of policies to increase the use of digital technologies in the public sector and improve service delivery and streamline bureaucratic processes via the internet (ECLAC, 2014).
50 For example, Lewis-Faupel et al. (2014) find 
that e-procurement improves quality of public works by encouraging bidding by more qualified contractors, although they do not find an impact on project cost.tHE  WILd cA rd: tE cHno LoGIcAL Inno VAtIon  19risks that arise from interactions with pub -
lic officials in the tender process.51
Information management for performance 
and security:  The effective management of 
public investment requires the production, analysis, and sharing of different types of 
information by different public agencies. 
ICT tools such as information or data dash
-
boards, which track, analyze, and display relevant performance metrics for a particu
-
lar project or program on a single interface, can help officials aggregate information 
inputs from different sources and monitor 
several indicators in real time (Edwards and 
Thomas, 2005; Lake, 2013). Dashboards 
thus help ensure that information on the 
performance of public investments is accu
-
rate, up-to-date, and accessible to all rel -
evant agencies through a user-friendly 
visualization. In this way, the tool can help 
identify inefficiencies and corruption risks 
as they arise.
Blockchain can also help break down 
information silos across government agen -
cies by providing a platform to record and secure information on public resource man
-
agement across government and transac -
tions between public and private entities (Santiso, 2018). A distinctive feature of 
blockchain is that each data record con
-
tains a unique timestamp and identifier 
(ledger). Some argue that this technology 
can therefore be used to record transac -
tions in a verifiable and permanent way on 
a single platform that actors across govern -
ment can access (Santiso, 2018). 
That said, there are at least three coun -
ter-arguments that need to be considered regarding the adoption of blockchain. First, 
according to some authors, blockchain 
has evolved into a tool for the creation of 
sophisticated Ponzi schemes,
52 particularly 
through the use of bitcoin and other dig -
ital or cryptocurrencies. The main reason 
is that digital currencies are not formally regulated by any financial authority, and 
their ecosystems lack checks and balances. 
Secondly, blockchain could potentially ben -
efit companies or individuals engaged in money laundering. A recent report of the 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA),
53 for example, claims that bitcoin is 
being used to facilitate trade-based money 
laundering schemes. Thirdly, corrupt actors 
could be at the end of the ledger, encrypt -
ing information to legitimize it, or benefit -
ing from the governance loopholes existing around the use of this technology. 
Finally, the use of cloud computing 
technologies can save public agencies on 
IT costs and help overcome physical stor
-
age constraints (Wyld, 2010). In this sense, 
governments and international organiza -
tions such as the World Bank (World Bank, 2016b) and the OECD (OECD, 2017) are 
vouching for the adoption of this technol
-
ogy. Cloud-computing services can help 
improve processes for PIMS by hosting 
complex management tools; fostering a 
secure digital environment for innovations 
within public agencies; allowing for a gran -
ular analysis of wide-ranging databases; 
and streamlining the interactions between 
governments and citizens through the real-
time and secure storage of citizen-gener -
ated content and feedback. Governments in Chile, Estonia, the Netherlands, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States as well as 
51 On this point, it is relevant to report the find -
ing from the World Bank’s enterprise surveys 
that 17 percent of firms in LAC believe they are expected to give gifts to secure a government contact. This figure is higher than in the case of other interactions with the public sector, such as securing a construction permit, obtaining an operating license, or getting an electricity or water connection (See http://www.enterprise
-
surveys.org/).
52 See https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/  
archive/2017/05/cryptocurrency-ponzi-  
schemes/528624/.
53 See https://www.dea.gov/docs/DIR-040-17_  
2017-NDTA.pdf.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT20supranational (the European Union) and 
subnational (Chicago, Paris, Cape Town) 
governments and agencies (e.g., the New 
York Public Library) already function par -
tially and totally with their services and pro -
cesses stored on the cloud. 
User feedback and citizen participation:  As 
discussed above, information flowing from 
end users to governments—user feedback—
can provide valuable information to public 
officials on the performance and quality of 
public services and infrastructure. Interac -
tive, web-based platforms allow citizens to flag problems in service delivery, report 
issues regarding interactions with pub
-
lic servants, and propose ways to improve 
government performance. These tools are 
increasingly making use of mobile apps, 
taking advantage of the rapid spread of 
smart phones to facilitate use of these 
channels. Examples of mobile apps for user 
feedback in the LAC region include Mexi -
co’s Incorruptible app, which allows citizens 
to report bribe solicitations, and PorMiBar -
rio in Uruguay, an app where residents of Montevideo can report public infrastruc
-
ture in need of repair and monitor the gov -
ernment’s response.54
Increasingly, opportunities for citizens 
to provide input into the government’s activ -
ities are going beyond feedback on specific public services and investment projects to 
include other areas. In Rio Grande do Sul 
(Brazil), citizens can vote to include differ
-
ent projects in the municipal budget via an online platform. This broader citizen engage
-
ment can take the form of crowdsourcing or others forms of collaboration. Mexico’s 
Secretaría de la Función Pública, a ministry 
charged with ensuring integrity in the public 
sector, has created a “smarter crowdsourc
-
ing” strategy that brings together subject 
matter experts and civil society organiza -
tions to identify and implement strategies to support the country’s new Anti-Corruption System.
55 Another underappreciated feature 
of technology-enabled tools is their ability 
to provide anonymous, secure channels for 
whistleblowing,56 which lowers its (often con -
siderable) costs. In this way, user feedback enhances the capacity of the public sector to 
identify and root out corruption risks.
While user feedback tools are con -
ceptually distinct from transparency as 
government disclosure, there are clear 
synergies between them. First, user feed -
back and other participatory platforms can 
enhance transparency by tracking and pub -
lishing how governments respond to citizen complaints or suggestions, as in the case 
of Uruguay’s PorMiBarrio app. Peixoto and Fox (2016) find that user feedback initia
-
tives that share such data create stronger 
incentives for accountability. In the case of 
PorMiBarrio, around 50 percent of com -
plaints are resolved—a high response rate 
in comparison with two dozen similar ini -
tiatives worldwide (Peixoto and Fox, 2016). In addition, web-based transparency ini
-
tiatives present an important opportunity to embed citizen feedback channels, thus 
enhancing their utility for government and 
citizen users. Citizen feedback portals both 
encourage engagement and interaction 
with the information and potentially gener
-
ate valuable information to enhance public sector oversight and performance.
54 The inclusion in the PorMiBarrio app of a fea -
ture that monitors and displays the govern -
ment’s response  to issues reported by citizens 
provides a useful example of the potential syn -
ergies between soliciting user feedback and 
enhancing transparency. See below.
55 This initiative applies a methodology developed 
by New York University’s Governance Lab and is supported by the IDB. See http://thegovlab.org/smarter-crowdsourcing-against-corruption/.
56 Whistleblowing generally refers to the expo -
sure of high-level or systematic corruption or wrongdoing within organizations (including the public and private sector). It thus differs from the denunciation of bribery solicitations by citizens in everyday interactions with public officials.tHE  WILd cA rd: tE cHno LoGIcAL Inno VAtIon  21Voice and diffusion:  Efforts to improve 
public sector efficiency often run into col -
lective action problems. Even if individual 
citizens or groups have the tools to moni -
tor the government, their ability to exercise voice and influence government action will 
be limited without collective action. How
-
ever, the ever-expanding menu of social 
media platforms dramatically increases the 
potential for citizens and civil society orga -
nizations and increases the power of ver -
tical accountability by raising the cost for 
officials who do not respond to citizen 
demands. This is particularly true in LAC, 
given the widespread use of social media in 
the region.57 Social media have been critical 
in organizing massive protests against poor public services in Brazil, high university 
fees in Chile, and corruption in Guatemala, which led to the resignation of President 
Pérez Molina in 2015 (Casas-Zamora and 
Carter, 2017). 
A good example of the power of social 
media to project voice is the recent 3x3 
campaign in Mexico. This civil society-led 
initiative to promote legislation requiring all 
Mexican public officials to declare and pub -
lish their tax statements, asset ownerships, 
and conflicts of interest made use of Twit -
ter, Facebook, Youtube, and other platforms to rally support for its cause. As a result of 
these efforts, the movement, led by the civil society organizations Plataforma Cuidadana and Instituto Mexicano para la Competitivi
-
dad, amassed more than 630,000 signa -
tures in three months—enough to require 
the national legislature to consider its pro -
posal. The body approved the 3x3 initiative and included it in the first package of new 
laws under Mexico’s National Anticorruption 
System in June 2016.
58
The ability of social media to enhance 
voice through diffusion can strengthen 
the relationship between information, citi -
zen action, and a positive state response, 
thus ensuring that transparency leads to 
better efficiency. These links help guaran -
tee that in cases where corruption, mis -
management, or inefficiency is exposed, 
there is sustained citizen action. Trans -
parency initiatives can easily encourage such broader engagement by embed
-
ding options to share information via social media platforms into the web-based infor
-
mation platforms discussed above. The IDB’s MapaInversiones project, discussed in 
the following section, provides an example 
of this integration of user-feedback-into-
transparency platforms.
57 As of 2015, 41 percent of Latin Americans used 
Facebook and another 25 had Youtube accounts 
(Casas-Zamora and Carter, 2017).
58 See http://ley3de3.mx/es/introduccion/.23
A PRACTICAL CASE: MAPAINVERSIONES 
In 2016, the IDB officially launched the 
MapaInversiones (MI)59 regional initiative, 
an online platform that allows users to 
monitor the physical and financial progress 
of public investment projects through data 
visualizations and geo-referenced maps. 
Following the principles of targeted trans -
parency discussed above, the MapaInver -
siones platforms enable easy interaction with public investment data, including the 
ability to search along a variety of dimen
-
sions, to download information to an Excel 
spreadsheet, and to share information 
through social media links embedded in the 
site. MapaInversiones platforms encourage 
citizen participation through a module that 
allows users to send comments, recom -
mendations, and demands to policymakers and contribute to the monitoring of public 
works by sharing photos and impressions 
of the progress of projects. 
MapaInversiones is more than just a 
technological innovation, however. The ini
-
tiative is based on the principle of access to information about public investments, 
not only with respect to its allocation but 
also during its execution. MapaInversiones 
is made possible by the existence of legal 
provisions, such as the Freedom of Infor
-
mation Acts (FOIA), which have been sanc -
tioned and implemented in most countries in LAC. In this sense, MapaInversiones is both an innovative way for public officials 
to fulfill FOIA requirements proactively and 
a tool to improve the way that information 
is managed and disclosed to the public.
Developing the back end of a MapaIn
-
versiones platform involves several steps 
within the responsible public agency to 
ensure that the information eventually 
made public through the platform is com -
plete, up to date, accurate, and suitable for complex analysis. These steps follow 
a bottom-up approach created by the MI 
technical team (Figure 3). A country can 
implement all of them at once, or gradually 
in several phases: (i) the institution has to 
develop structures to capture and also inte
-
grate information and data that are often 
not in place; (ii) the institution must gen -
erate capacities to ensure that information is automatically delivered and processed 
(switching from manual to automatic 
uploading); (iii) protocols must be put in 
place to standardize and parametrize the 
information captured; (iv) the information 
captured requires (even at a basic stage) 
implementing a methodology to guarantee that it has the minimum quality standards; 
(v) once the information flows automatically 
into the institutions’ systems, analytical and 
59 Also referred to as MapaInversiones, in English; 
see www.iadb.org/mapainversiones.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT24business intelligence software components 
can be constructed to improve analytical 
capabilities; (vi) public workers must be 
trained to manage the tools created; (vii) 
social control tools can be activated in the 
platform to allow citizens to monitor public 
works; and (viii) data can be georeferenced 
and visualized. The ultimate objective of this methodology is to create information 
management tools that are able to foster a cultural shift in the way the public perceives 
and monitors public investment.
The MI intervention was first devel -
oped in Colombia in 2013, with the Mapa -
Regalías pilot. In this instance, the platform has been used to improve transparency 
and information management surround
-
ing the allocation and use of mining and 
hydrocarbon royalties. A crucial source of revenue for the resource-rich coun -
try, these royalties have been vulnerable to corruption risks and inefficient spend
-
ing, especially by local governments.60 In 
response to this situation, the national gov -
ernment reformed the system for sharing royalties among subnational governments 
in 2011, creating the General System of 
Royalties (Sistema General de Regalías, 
or SGR), which established new rules for 
60 Royalties from oil and mineral exploitation 
make up around 30 percent of Colombia’s total 
government revenue. This income is distributed among the country’s 32 departmental and 1,101 municipal governments, which use the income to finance investment projects. The commodity boom of the 2000s led to a massive increase in the resources at the disposal of these entities, leading to several cases of corruption and mis
-
management (Arisi and González, 2014).FIGURE 3: THE BACK END OF MAPAINVERSIONES
Geo-referencing / visualization of data
Development and implementation of social control tools
Training of public workers to manage information systems
Development of protocols to standardize and
parameterize information
Design and application of analytical and business 
intelligence methodologies
Generation of capacities within the organizations to improve
the automatic delivery and processing of data (not manually)
Development of a methodology to guarantee the quality
of the data
Development of tools to capture and integrate information
Source: Authors’ elaboration.A Pr ActIcAL cASE : MAPA InVErSIon ES 25the distribution, administration, oversight, 
and use of royalties. Among the goals of 
the new system were more equal distribu -
tion among local entities and more rigor -
ous oversight of the spending financed by 
these revenues. However, the central gov -
ernment’s National Planning Department (Departamento Nacional de Pleaneación, 
or DNP), the ministry responsible for the 
SGR, lacked an integrated information sys
-
tem to effectively monitor the resources.
In the years since its implementation 
in 2014, MapaRegalías has contributed to a reduction in project implementation time 
and preventive suspensions of royalty dis
-
tributions and has been well received by 
both citizen and public sector users. The 
number of Colombians using the platform 
increased from 20,000 in 2014 to over 75,000 by 2016, and the tool has been eval -
uated positively by municipal government officials in executing agencies. Images of 
nearly three-quarters of all public invest
-
ment projects financed through royalties in 
Colombia are now uploaded, up from only 
6 percent in 2014. Additionally, thanks to 
MapaRegalías, the number of irregularities 
detected and referred to a control insti -
tution (mainly the Attorney General) rose 
from just 57 in 2013 to over 1,000 in 2016.61 
Finally, an upcoming publication with the 
evaluation of the platform provides evi -
dence that the intervention caused an 
approximate 11 percentage point increase MAP 1: HOME OF THE MAPAREGALÍAS PLATFORM, COLOMBIA ( LINK )
Source: MapaRegalias platform, Colombia.
61 Data extracted from the SMSCE (Monitor -
ing and Evaluation) Information System of the 
National Planning Department (Colombia).DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT26in project completion rates.62 Colombia 
recently introduced an expanded version 
of the platform, which covers all public 
investment projects. 
In 2018, MapaInversiones platforms 
were launched in Costa Rica  and in 
Paraguay . In addition to these two coun -
tries, technical work has already begun on the development and implementation 
of platforms in Argentina, the Bahamas, 
Jamaica, and Peru. MapaInversiones Costa 
Rica visualizes all the public investment in 
the country, equivalent to approximately 
US$8 billion in projects in execution con
-
tained in the database of the Public Invest -
ment Bank of the Ministry of National 
Planning. Through this initiative, Costa 
Rica seeks to improve transparency in 
public investment and provide key infor -
mation to citizens, especially social actors interested in monitoring public invest
-
ment. In addition, the platform is an input to help Costa Rica meet international com
-
mitments such as the CoST Transparency standard. 
MapaInversiones Paraguay visualizes 
the public investment data contained in 
the Projects Bank of the country’s National 
Public Investment System (Sistema Nacio -
nal de Inversión Pública, or SNIP). The IDB team collaborated closely with SNIP and 
the Ministry of Finance so that US$4 billion 
in public projects can now be viewed on 
the platform. In addition, the development 
in Paraguay included conducting focus 
groups and in-depth interviews with key 
stakeholders in the country,
63 which was 
crucial to improve the platform’s function -
alities at a regional level. The MapaInversio -
nes platform supports Paraguay’s efforts to comply with its commitments undertaken 
in international standards, such as the Open 
Government Partnership.
How does the MapaInversiones initia
-
tive work? MapaInversiones projects are created by governments at the national level that demonstrate an interest in joining 
the initiative, and an IDB multidisciplinary 
team in charge of the design and techni
-
cal guidance during the development of the platforms. Countries first undertake an 
inventory of existing information systems 
for public investment to identify institu
-
tional and technological barriers to imple -
ment the platform. This diagnostic applies an Enterprise Architecture (EA) methodol
-
ogy to develop operational solutions that ensure a high-quality platform.
64 In this way, 
implementation of MI requires that govern -
ments improve their internal information management systems for public invest
-
ment as an initial step toward operationaliz -
ing the platform, helping to boost efficiency independent of monitoring efforts.
The development and implementa
-
tion of the platform involves the design of pilot data visualization tools, mechanisms 
to update the quality and timeliness of the 
data visualized in the platform, and various 
institutional strategies to optimize informa
-
tion management and oversight based on 
the data presented on the site. Once oper -
ational, the site consists of a home page, a localization view, and a project view. The 
localization view presents government 
spending and income data and the port
-
folio of projects in a given jurisdiction. The project pages provide access to informa
-
tion on several important components 
62 In addition to this, rigorous impact evaluations 
are being carried out in Costa Rica and Para -
guay (where the tool was launched in 2017) in 
order to assess their impact.
63 For more information see: http://mapain -
versionessnip.economia.gov.py/documentos/Usabilidad% 20Paraguay%20BID%2010-17.pdf.
64 This analysis includes test to ensure the data 
on public investments that forms the basis of the platform is high quality, which resulted in a dou
-
bling of the average data quality in the cases of Costa Rica and Paraguay. It also involves a thor
-
ough review of relevant legal and regulatory frameworks to establish the extent of informa
-
tion that can be published.A Pr ActIcAL cASE : MAPA InVErSIon ES 27MAP 2: HOME, MAPAINVERSIONES PARAGUAY (LINK)
Source: MapaInversiones platform, Paraguay.
IMAGE 1: CAAGUAZÚ DEPARTMENT PROFILE, MAPAINVERSIONES PARAGUAY ( LINK )
Source: MapaInversiones platform, Paraguay.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT28compliance goals, and indicators of the 
physical and financial status of the project 
and its social and economic results. of investment projects: sources of fund -
ing, amounts spent, project objectives, 
executing agencies, project contractors, IMAGE 2:  PROJECT PROFILE “CONSTRUCTION OF THE ROAD FROM SAN 
CARLOS, SIFÓN – CIUDAD QUESADA” (LINK), MAPAINVERSIONES COSTA RICA
Source: MapaInversiones platform, Costa Rica.29
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
This paper concludes with concrete pol -
icy recommendations for improving the 
transparency of public investments in LAC 
through technological solutions. This sec -
tion draws on the lessons from the Mapa -
Inversiones initiative and other experiences 
supported (or promoted) by the IDB, as well 
as a review of evaluations of the region’s 
PIMS and transparency and anti-corrup -
tion efforts more broadly. The recommen -
dations fall into two categories. The first consists of specific strategies to enhance 
the effectiveness of technology-based ini
-
tiatives to improve transparency and infor -
mation management in public investment. 
The second addresses the broader politi -
cal economy and institutional challenges in the public investment cycle. Given the com
-
plexity of managing public investment proj -
ects, it is critical for governments to take a holistic view of the risks to investment 
efficiency and the array of possible solu
-
tions. It is also important to underscore that 
solid legal frameworks remain an impor -
tant requirement for effective PIMS. As the example of MapaInversiones shows, robust 
legal provisions in areas such as access to 
information, competitive public procure
-
ment, and budget transparency continue to form the backbone of strong public invest
-
ment management and provide the basis for the innovative application of digital 
technologies.
Improving Project Design 
and Implementation
The design and development of techno -
logical solutions should be tailored to cli -
ent needs. Off-the-shelf platforms often 
present issues in terms of adaptation to 
client needs and compatibility with exist -
ing information systems. To mitigate these 
risks, the MapaInversiones team crafted a 
methodology to identify prerequisites for 
the development of the platform. These 
diagnostics included an EA exercise carried 
out with government officials (especially 
with those in charge of public investment) 
in every country that participates in the initiative. This methodology is fundamen
-
tal to identify, structure and operation -
alize the needs and requirements of the client in an orderly manner and transfer 
the highest quality standards to the deter
-
mined solution. As a result, the platforms 
have responded to critical gaps both in 
countries’ public investment management 
(allowing for the capture, processing, and 
visualization of quality information) and 
in their information systems (allowing for DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT30improvements such as the capture of the 
physical progress of investment projects).
There is no open data without quality data.  Access to data will do little to improve 
information management and transparency in public investment projects if the data are 
not high quality. Efforts to ensure data qual
-
ity are therefore a fundamental prerequisite 
for the success of any information manage -
ment or transparency intervention. In the case of the MapaInversiones initiative, a pre
-
liminary diagnosis of data quality is carried out at the start of the development phase. 
Based on this exercise, the team develops a 
targeted plan to implement in each country 
(using the Six-Sigma methodology), prior 
to the launch of the platform. In the cases 
of Costa Rica and Paraguay, this process 
has enabled them to increase the quality 
of the data (or reduce the half the number 
of errors per million data) in critical project 
variables in just six months both in Costa 
Rica and Paraguay.
Engage with users. Technological solutions must be designed to encourage active use 
by citizens and civil society. As such, gov
-
ernments must ensure that the information 
is disclosed in a format and context that is 
understandable and relevant for different 
classes of potential users by working with 
these groups. Critically, this collaboration 
should be attuned to the range of capac -
ities and interests of different information users: civil society, the private sector, spe
-
cialized journalists and academics, and the general public. In preparing the MapaIn
-
versiones platforms, the IDB convened a comprehensive usability exercise with dif
-
ferent types of potential users of the plat -
form to improve its design and usability. This exercise was carried out in Paraguay in 
2017, and resulted in the formation of three 
focus groups with (i) specialized journalists, 
(ii) NGOs, and (iii) civil society, including the private sector and four interviews with government and opposition policymak
-
ers specialized in public investment ( report 
here). During the sessions, concerns of civil 
society and journalists surrounding the 
extent and quality of information as well as 
the robustness of mechanisms for citizen 
interaction were raised. These discussions 
led to recommendations to include more 
contextual information on the MI tool and public investment in the country, expand 
the options for user feedback, and better 
integrate the platform with social media, 
among others.
Use citizen feedback strategically. The 
impact of transparency initiatives can be 
multiplied by facilitating “citizen feedback.” 
This channel of communication from citi
-
zens to the government not only provides 
valuable information with which officials 
can improve the management of particu -
lar projects but also provides more general 
data on the preferences and priorities of 
different groups of citizens to inform future 
investment planning. In addition, govern -
ments can encourage feedback from spe -
cialized groups by targeting academics and civil society, especially in technical areas 
such as project appraisal and ex post eval
-
uations. Soliciting and responding to citizen 
feedback—and publishing the response—is 
a powerful way for governments to build 
trust with the public. 
PorMiBarrio, a mobile app, is a good 
example on why encouraging citizen feed -
back is crucial. This app allows residents of Montevideo to identify public infrastructure 
in need of repair and to monitor the govern
-
ment’s response to these concerns. These 
features have helped achieve a high rate of 
resolution of issues flagged by citizens. Like -
wise, the MapaInversiones platforms include 
a citizen participation module embedded 
in the profile of each project, allowing users 
to send feedback about specific projects to PoLIcY rE coMME ndAtIon S 31project managers. The development of the 
platform for Argentina—currently underway—
will enhance citizen feedback by linking users 
of the platform to specific locales, facilitat -
ing a more targeted government response. A future application in this direction would 
be allowing the platforms to conduct virtual, 
face-to-face audits between citizens and proj
-
ect managers.
Measuring impact is crucial. Despite con -
siderable theoretical and empirical evi -
dence, governments still may be hesitant to devote resources to develop technology-
enabled transparency initiatives. Generat
-
ing data on the impact of such interventions 
is crucial for consolidating support for 
them and justifying future investments 
in this area. Projects should therefore be 
designed to include robust impact evalu -
ations. On this point, the implementation 
of MapaInversiones platforms has included 
an innovative strategy to measure impact, 
which will provide an important source of 
data on the effect of the platforms on key 
outcomes such as project completion and 
actual cost relative to projected costs. The 
method consists of randomly assigning a subgroup of projects or executing agencies 
to be included in the platform at an earlier 
stage (the treatment group) than the rest 
of the projects or agencies, which make 
up the control group. Due to the random nature of the assignment, any observed 
differences in project completion or cost 
between the control and treatment groups 
can be attributed to the causal effect of 
inclusion in the platform and the expecta
-
tion of greater monitoring. Whenever ran -
dom assignment cannot be applied, other methods can be used. For example, the 
impact evaluation for MapaRegalías fea
-
tured a pre-test/post-test single group 
quasi-experimental design, comparing the 
projects before and after their inclusion in 
the platform. This revealed an 11 percent increase in project completion rates in 
the seven months following the adoption 
of the platform, compared to prior imple -
mentation rates. Moreover, quantitative assessments will be complemented with 
qualitative and mixed-methods techniques, 
including surveys, focus groups, and in-
depth interviews, among others.
Managing Political Economy 
and Institutional Challenges 
Strengthen the link between public invest -
ment management and national develop -
ment strategies. The strategic choice of 
investment projects based on technical, high-
quality ex ante evaluation, and their align -
ment with broader development objectives is 
key for leveraging public investment to drive 
growth. However, the reviews of LAC’s PIMS 
discussed in this paper suggest that govern -
ments in the region often lack the capacity to carry out rigorous appraisals to inform 
budgetary allocations and project selec
-
tion. As a result, this important first step in 
the public investment cycle is weak. There 
is ample opportunity to leverage transpar -
ency and information management strategies 
to improve this phase of public investment 
management. First, facilitating the availabil -
ity and analysis of information on past proj -
ect performance through new technologies 
can greatly enhance the capacity of the pub -
lic sector to carry out project appraisal and make strategic decisions about future invest
-
ments. In addition, greater transparency on the methodologies and criteria used in proj
-
ect appraisal can help encourage more active citizen participation—including from spe
-
cialized groups—to improve these functions. Finally, citizen feedback on investment proj
-
ects can provide valuable information on the priorities of different groups, helping guide 
the strategic allocation of public resources 
across different sectors.DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT32Promote coordination across levels and 
sectors of government.  One unavoidable 
reality of public investment management is its complexity. Any project necessar
-
ily involves the intervention of a number of public sector agencies, from finance and 
planning ministries to auditing and over
-
sight offices and front-line project imple -
mentors, often at the local level. As a result, 
no effort to improve efficiency and trans -
parency can prosper without effective coordination. This point needs to be con
-
sidered at the onset by identifying all the relevant public sector actors and ensuring 
buy-in for any new initiative. The impor
-
tance of strong interinstitutional coordi -
nation among relevant public agencies is 
illustrated well in the case of Costa Rica. In 
designing and implementing the MapaIn -
versiones platform, the IDB worked closely 
with four key ministries—the National Plan -
ning Ministry, the Ministry of the Presidency, the Ministry of Public Works and Transpor
-
tation, and the Ministry of Finance. This was critical to establish common objectives 
regarding data quality standards, the defi
-
nition of user categories, and citizen partic -
ipation mechanisms. 
Be aware of the limitations and opportuni -
ties of the specific context. There is no one-
size-fits-all intervention to improve public 
investment management. This is especially 
true for the application of cutting-edge digital technologies, which often require a 
high level of technical competence among 
potential users. Initiatives to improve trans -
parency and efficiency, therefore, must consider these limitations and constraints 
to ensure their effectiveness and avoid cre
-
ating unrealistic expectations. Two exam -
ples from MapaInversiones illustrate this 
point. In Colombia, the implementation of 
MapaRegalías took place shortly after a 
Constitutional reform, which changed the 
rules for managing and distributing natu -
ral resource revenues among subnational 
governments. In this context, there was a 
consensus on the need for an integrated 
information system to monitor royalties, 
leading to strong motivation and support 
across various governmental institutions 
for the MapaRegalías platform. In the case 
of Paraguay, the launch of the MapaInver -
siones platform represented a dramatic step forward in the level of information 
available about public investments in the 
country. While this was clearly a welcome 
development, the unprecedented nature of 
the project also meant that potential users 
had less experience with such transpar
-
ency tools and the information they con -
tain. The site was modified accordingly to 
include supporting data and context sur -
rounding public investment in the country to ensure the public investment information 
in the platform is understandable and rele
-
vant to users.33
REFERENCES
Arisi, D. and A. C. González Espinosa. 2014. 
Transparency in the Management of 
Revenues from the Extractive Indus -
tries: The Case of Colombia. In J. C. 
Vieyra and M. Masson (eds.) Transpar -
ent Governance in an Age of Abun -
dance: Experiences from the Extractive Industries in Latin America and the 
Caribbean . Washington, DC: Inter-
American Development Bank.
Armendáriz, E., E. Contreras Villablanca, S. 
Orozco, and G. Parra. 2016. La eficien
-
cia del gasto de inversión pública en 
América Latina. XXI Congreso Interna -
cional del CLAD sobre la Reforma del Estado y de la Administración Pública. 
Santiago, Chile, November 8–11, 2016.
Arslanalp, S., F. Bonhorst, S. Gupta, and E. 
Sze. 2010. Public Capital and Growth. 
IMF Working Paper 10/175. Washing
-
ton, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Becker, G. and G. Stigler. 1974. Law Enforce -
ment, Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers. The Journal of Legal Stud
-
ies, 3(1): 1–18.
Bjorkman, M. and J. Svensson. 2009. Power 
to the People: Evidence from a Ran -
domized Field Experiment on Com -
munity-based Monitoring in Uganda. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 
735–69.Casas-Zamora, K. and M. Carter. 2017. 
Beyond the Scandals: The Changing 
Context of Corruption in Latin Amer
-
ica. Rule of Law Report, February 2017. Washington, DC: Inter-American 
Dialogue. 
Collier, P. and A. Hoeffler. 2005. The Eco -
nomic Costs of Corruption in Infra -
structure. In Transparency International, 
Global Corruption Report 2005: Corrup -
tion in Construction and Post-Conflict Reconstruction.  London: Pluto Press.
Collier, P. and A. Venables. 2008. Managing 
Resource Revenues: Lessons for Low 
Income Countries. OxCarre Research 
Paper No. 2008-12. Oxford Cen -
tre for the Analysis of Resource Rich Economies.
Coolidge, J. and S. Rose-Ackerman. 1997. 
High-level Rent Seeking and Cor
-
ruption in African Regimes. Policy Research Working Paper No. 1780, 
The World Bank Private Sector Devel
-
opment Department. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
Dabla-Norris, E. et al. 2012. Investing in 
Public Investment: An Index of Public 
Investment Efficiency. Journal of Eco -
nomic Growth  17(3): 235–66.
Dal Bo, E. and M. A. Rossi. 2007. Corruption 
and Efficiency: Theory and Evidence DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT34from Electric Utilities. Journal of Public 
Economics  91(5–6): 939–62.
de Michele. R. 2017. Escándalos de corrup -
ción en América Latina ¿Por qué soy optimista? Available at: https://blogs.
iadb.org/gobernarte/2017/05/31/
escandalos-corrupcion-optimista/.
de Michele R., J. Prats, and I. Losada Revol. 
2018. Efectos de la corrupción en los 
contratos de asociaciones público-
privadas: consecuencias de un enfoque de tolerancia cero. Documento para 
Discusión, IDB-DP-625. Washington 
DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean). 2014. Pan -
orama de gestión pública en América Latina y el Caribe. Santiago, Chile: ECLAC.
Edwards, D. and J. C. Thomas. 2005. 
Developing a Municipal Performance-
Measurement System: Reflections on 
the Atlanta Dashboard. Journal of Pub -
lic Administration  65(3): 369–76.
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan. 2008. Exposing 
Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Bra -
zil’s Publicly Released Audits on Elec -
toral Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics  123(2): 703–745.
Flyvbjerg, B. 2009. Survival of the Unfit
-
test: Why the Worst Infrastructure Gets Built—and What We Can Do About It. 
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 25 
(3): 344–67.
Fox, J. 2015. Social Accountability: What 
Does the Evidence Really Say? World 
Development  72: 346–61.
Fung, A., M. Graham, and D. Weil. 2008. Full 
Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of 
Transparency, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 2013. Targeting Transparency. Science 
Magazine. 340(6139): 1410–11.
Gupta, S., A. Kangur, C. Papageorgiou, and 
A. Wane. 2014. Efficiency-Adjusted Pub -
lic Capital and Growth. World Develop -
ment  57: 164–78. Gupta, S., E. Liu, and C. Mulas-Granados. 
2016. Now or Later? The Political Econ -
omy of Public Investment in Democ -
racies. European Journal of Political 
Economy  45: 101–114.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank) 
2018a. Acción para el crecimiento: Recomendaciones de Políticas y Plan 
de Acción 2018–2021 para el Cre
-
cimiento en las Américas. Diálogo Empresarial de las Américas, 2018. 
Washington, DC: IDB.
———. 2018b. La hora del crecimiento: 
Informe macroeconómico de América 
Latina y el Caribe. Washington DC: IDB.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. 
Making Public Investment More Efficient. 
Staff Report. Washington, DC: IMF.
Joshi, A. 2014. Reading the Local Context: 
A Causal Chain Approach to Social Accountability. IDS Bulletin 45(5): 23–35.
Keefer, P., and S. Knack. 2002. Boondog -
gles and Expropriation: Rent Seeking 
and Policy Distortion when Property 
Rights are Insecure. World Bank Pol -
icy Research Working Paper no 2910. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2007. Boondoggles, Rent-Seeking, 
and Political Checks and Balances: 
Public Investment under Unaccount -
able Governments. The Review of Eco -
nomics and Statistics , 89(3): 566–72.
Klitgaard, R. 1988. Controlling Corruption. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press.
Lagunes, P. 2017. Guardians of Accountabil -
ity: A Field Experiment on Corruption and Inefficiency in Local Public Works. 
International Growth Centre Working 
Paper C-89335-PER-1. 
Lake, C. 2013. 24 Beautifully Designed 
Web Dashboards that Data Geeks will Love. Econsultancy . Available at: http://
econsultancy.com/ie/blog/62844-24-
 
beautifully-designed-web-dashboards-that-data-geeks-will-love .rEFEr Enc ES 35Lewis-Faupel S., Y. Neggers, B. A. Olken, 
and R. Pande. 2014. Can Electronic 
Procurement Improve Infrastruc -
ture Provision? Evidence from Public 
Works in India and Indonesia. Interna -
tional Growth Centre Working Paper S-2007-CCN-1.
Lieberman, E., D. Posner, and L. Tsai. 2014. 
Does Information Lead to More Active 
Citizenship? Evidence from an Educa
-
tion Intervention in Rural Kenya. World 
Development, 60(C): 69–83.
Mainwaring, S. and C. Welna. (Eds.) 2003. 
Democratic Accountability in Latin Amer -
ica. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mauro, P. 1998. Corruption and the Com -
position of Government Expenditure. Journal of Public Economics 69 (2): 
263–79.
Moreno, L. A. 2017. How Tech can Fight 
Corruption in Latin America and the Caribbean. World Economic Forum , 
December 14, 2017. Available at: https://
www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/12/
how-technology-is-becoming-a-power
-
ful-ally-in-the-fight-against-corruption-in-latin-america-and-the-caribbean.
O’Donnell, G. 1993. On the State, Democrati -
zation and Some Conceptual Problems: A Latin American View with Glances 
at Some Post-Communist Countries. 
World Development  21(8): 1355–69.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development). 2016a. 
Panorama de las Administraciones 
Públicas: América Latina y el Caribe 2017. Paris: Éditions OCDE.
———. 2016b. Preventing Corruption in Public 
Procurement. Paris: OECD Publications.
———. 2017. Perspectivas de la OCDE sobre 
la economía digital. Paris: OECD Publications.
Olken, B. 2007. Monitoring Corruption: Evi
-
dence from a Field Experiment in Indo -
nesia. Journal of Political Economy 
115(2): 200–49.———. 2009. Corruption Perceptions vs. Cor -
ruption Reality. Journal of Public Eco -
nomics  93(7–8): 950–64.
Pritchett, L. 2000. The Tyranny of Con -
cepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment Effort) Is Not Capital. Jour
-
nal of Economic Growth 5: 361–84. 
Peixoto, T. and J. Fox. 2016. When Does ICT-
Enabled Citizen Voice Lead to Govern -
ment Responsiveness? Background Paper for World Bank 2016 World Development 
Report. Washington DC: World Bank.
Rajaram, A., et al. 2014. The Power of Pub -
lic Investment Management: Transform -
ing Resources into Assets for Growth , 
Washington DC: World Bank.
Reinikka, R. and J. Svensson. 2005. Fight -
ing Corruption to Improve Schooling: 
Evidence from a Newspaper Campaign 
in Uganda. Journal of the European 
Economic Association  3(2): 259–67.
———. 2011. The Power of Information in Pub -
lic Services: Evidence from Education in Uganda. Journal of Public Econom
-
ics 95: 956–66.
Robinson, J. and R. Torvik. 2005. White 
Elephants. Journal of Public Economics 
89: 197–210.
Rose-Ackerman, S. 1978. Corruption: A 
Study in Political Economy. Cambridge, 
MA: Academic Press Inc.
———. 1975. The Economics of Corrup -
tion. Journal of Public Economics 4(2): 
187–203.
Santiso, C. 2018. Will Blockchain Disrupt 
Government Corruption? Stanford Social Innovation Review . Available 
at: https://ssir.org/articles/entry/will_
blockchain_disrupt_government_  
corruption .
Tanzi, V. and H. Davoodi. 1997. Corruption, 
Public Investment, and Growth. IMF Working Paper 97/139. Washington DC: 
International Monetary Fund.
Vieyra, J. C. 2016. Cuatro claves para 
entender la corrupción en América DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC INVESTMENT36Latina. Foreign Affairs Latinoamérica . 
October 31. Available at: http://revista -
fal.com/cuatro-claves-para-entender-
la-corrupcion-en-latinoamerica/ .
Warner, A. 2014. Public Investment as an 
Engine of Growth. IMF Working Paper 
14/148. Washington DC: International 
Monetary Fund.
World Bank. 2004. Making Services Work 
for Poor People. World Development 
Report 2004. Washington DC: World 
Bank.———. 2010. Enterprise Surveys. Washington 
DC: World Bank.
———. 2016a. Digital Dividends. World Devel -
opment Report 2016. Washington DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Cloud Computing Overview. 
World Bank Working Papers, 114837. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wyld, D. C. 2010. The Cloudy Future of 
Government IT: Cloud Computing and 
the Public Sector Around the World. International Journal of Web & Seman
-
tic Technology  (IJWesT)  1(1): 1–20.