Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah, Antonio Rodrigues* and Thomas Van Der Walt
Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
in Distance Education in Ghana
https://doi.org/10.1515/libri-2017-0033
Received May 9, 2017; accepted August 23, 2017
Abstract : The purpose of this study was to explore the
extent to which individual factors such as academic
tasks, preference for print sources and information skills
influence distance learners ’use of digital libraries in a
teacher distance education programme at the University
of Education, Winneba in Ghana. The population of the
study consisted of 1,834 distance students and from a
sample size of 641 distance learners spread across three
distance study centers, namely, Winneba (247), Kumasi
(276) and Asante-Mampong (118). A total of 453 (70.67
percent) distance learners, selected randomly, completed
a 31-item questionnaire. In addition, 30 distance educa-
tion tutors, four coordinators and four librarians were
purposively selected to participate in the study. The find-
ings showed that academic tasks of distance learners did
not require them to use digital library resources, which
resulted in low or no academic use of digital libraries.
The findings also pointed to a high preference for print
resources among distance learners which resulted in the
low use of digital library resources. Finally, it was noted
that even though most of the distance learners possessed
basic ICT skills, this did not result in their of use of digital
library resources. To improve digital library use in dis-
tance education, it is recommended that academic librar-
ians seek and foster collaboration in teaching
information literacy and library instruction in distance
education, an approach which must be backed by a
policy that mandates the use of (digital) library scholarly
resources in teaching and learning in distance education.
It is also recommended that the Centre for Distance
Education and the University Library collaborate to offer
training programmes in specific digital resources and
general information literacy courses for all distanceeducation stakeholders in the university to boost digital
library use.
Keywords : digital libraries, distance learners, information
skills, Ghana
Introduction
Higher education institutions in Ghana have significantly
expanded their academic programmes through distance
education, leading to an unprecedented rise in student
populations. At the same time, many have raised con-
cerns over the quality of teaching and learning in the
whole educational system, particularly with the emer-
gence of distance education as a major new trend in the
higher education sector. Distance education provides
teaching and learning facilities in the non-traditional
mode and when effective involves the provision of paral-
lel academic and non-academic learner support, such as
library services to distance learners (Alfrih 2010).
Furthermore, academic libraries in Ghana, like their
counterparts in the developed world, have taken advan-
tage of advances in Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) to implement digital library services to
extend their services beyond the boundaries of the phy-
sical library for the benefit of both on-campus and dis-
tance learners.
Digital libraries have a considerable positive impact
on education, as they enable sharing of learning
resources in support of not only distance education but
also on-campus and independent discovery-based learn-
ing (Fox, Gonçalves, and Kipp 2002). The growth in the
development of digital libraries is attributable to an
increasing realisation of the importance of lifelong learn-
ing and the move towards student-centredness. This ris-
ing phenomenon has resulted in the recognition that
digital libraries are crucial in providing access to much
needed digital information resources (Tedd and Large
2005, 14). Digital libraries can be considered appropri-
ately as powerful resources that can provide new oppor-
tunities to engage students in learning (Shih et al. 2011).
They can enhance learning among distance learners by
promoting access to resources that encourage students to
investigate authentic scientific questions using real data,*Corresponding author: Antonio Rodrigues, Department of
Information Science, University of South Africa, Pretoria, South
Africa, E-mail: trodriqu@unisa.ac.za
Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah, University Library, University of
Education, Winneba, Ghana, E-mail: chrisoansah@gmail.com
Thomas Van Der Walt, Department of Information Science,
University of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa,
E-mail: Vdwaltb@unisa.ac.zaLIBRI 2018; 68(2): 125 –135
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMhelp students develop a view of knowledge as inquiry
and provide a common ground linking students with a
community of practising professionals (Shih et al. 2011).
Previous studies explored distance learners ’use of
technology generally and in open distance learning con-
texts where technology is seen as essential to distance
learning (Diaz 2012; Martey 2004; Poellhuber et al. 2013).
In other studies, the use of open Internet resources by
distance learners and their general information behaviour
were the focus (Ng 2013; Oladokun 2010a; Oladokun
2010b, 2014), however in most studies the attention has
been on general provision of library services to distance
learners through several models (Abdelrahman 2012;
Brooke, McKinney, and Donoghue 2013; Diaz 2012; Hill,
Li, and Macheak 2013; Okello ‐Obura 2010). To a large
extent, most of these studies have focused much on the
design and usability aspects of digital libraries to the
detriment of individual factors, however a notable study
that explored individual factors influencing the use of
digital library resources was conducted more than 10
years ago by Liu and Yang (2004).
The value of this article is the insight it provides into
the individual factors that promote the use of academic
library digital resources in a distance education pro-
gramme that makes use of a hybrid delivery approach
(print and online) (Owusu-Mensah, Anyan, and Denkyi
2015). This article is part of a larger study designed to
understand the use of digital libraries in a distance edu-
cation programme for teachers in Ghana. The findings
from this article will, hopefully, be useful to academic
librarians in distance education institutions, distance
education planners and distance learners.
Background
The setting of this study is a large dual-mode, multi-cam-
pus public university in Ghana, the University of
Education, Winneba. The University comprises a main
campus (Winneba), three satellite campuses (Kumasi,
Mampong and Ajumako) and 33 distance learning centres
across the ten regions of Ghana (UEW Diary 2017). It is one
of the largest teacher education universities in Africa with
a total student population of 57,000 (UEW Diary 2017). As
a result of its focus on teacher education, it employs
distance education as a major strategy to upgrade and
train both under-qualified and unqualified teachers.
Teacher distance education at the undergraduate
level in this university employs both the print and elec-
tronic media. Distance learners at the university arerequired to attend tutorial sessions at the end of every
month in their study centres with a course tutor, while
printed course modules are supplied to distance educa-
tion students to enable independent study. The day-to-
day administration of the centres is the responsibility of
the centre coordinator who ensures that essential support
services such as library services are provided to students
(University of Education, Winneba Website 2015).
Developments in the world of technology have given
rise to massive developments in digital libraries, which
often pose identity or definitional challenges. A number
of theoretical and practical definitions of the concept of
the digital library have been proffered in Calhoun (2014,
21–23), with the definitions making it obvious that the
digital library field is very dynamic and increasingly
evolving. The digital libra ry in this study is described
as a virtual library that provides integrated access to the
services and digital collections of the library for the
academic community. The UEW Library supports dis-
tance education with the provision of digital library
resources and services which include open access scho-
larly resources, subscription online bibliographic and
full-text databases, an online public access catalogue
(OPAC) and an online institutional repository. Access
to subscription digital resources is provided through
Intranet and a proxy server which ensure that on-cam-
pus users are able to access resources through an
Internet Protocol, whereas distance (off-campus) users
are able to access through an authorized log-in system.
These resources significantly complement information
provision in the virtual learning space and if integrated
into the distance education curriculum can contribute to
achieving teaching and learning outcomes (Sander et al.
2006).
Statement of the Problem
Distance learners are expected to make use of digital
library services to bridge the digital divide (Henning
2010). However, in spite of the obvious advantages of
digital libraries in distance education, a number of stu-
dies suggest that distance learners in developing con-
texts, especially Africa, are still dependent on print
sources (Larson and Owusu-Acheaw 2016; Oladokun
2010b). As a result, distance learners in these contexts
lose the benefits of quality digital information that can
significantly enrich and enhance their learning.
Cognisant of their mandate to provide information
support to every member of the academic community,126 Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMacademic librarians are seeking ways to encourage the
use of digital library services in distance education. The
question of what factors influence the use of digital
libraries in a largely print-mode distance education pro-
gramme becomes more critical. Even though factors such
as ease of use, usefulness, flow experience and environ-
mental elements are believed to influence digital library
use and information seeking (Joo and Choi 2016; Liu and
Yang 2004; Zha et al. 2015), the purpose of this study was
to explore the individual factors that have the potential to
influence distance learners ’use of digital libraries. These
include the academic tasks of students, preference for
print resources and information skills training of distance
learners. Consequently, this article seeks to answer the
following research questions:
1. To what extent do academic tasks influence the use
of digital libraries by distance learners?
2. To what extent does the use of print sources influ-
ence the use of digital libraries by distance learners?
3. To what extent does information skills training influ-
ence the use of digital libraries in the distance educa-
tion programme?
The Role of Individual Factors
in Digital Library Use
Digital libraries have been developed in many academic
libraries worldwide. Despite the increasing availability of
digital resources in academic libraries, a number of fac-
tors conspire against the use of digital library resources
in distance education. Some of these are the relevance of
digital library resources to academic work in distance
education, preference for print resources and poor or
inadequate information skills of distance learners.
Academic tasks have been found to influence dis-
tance learners ’attitudes toward the usage or non-usage
of digital library resources and services. Damilola (2013)
found that 165 (66 percent) of distance learners reported
using electronic resources for various purposes such as
knowledge acquisition (29.2 percent), information
exchange (29.2 percent) and writing academic projects
(6.4 percent). In a follow-up question, their findings
also showed that most distance learners (42.8 percent)
were motivated to use electronic resources for “informa-
tion facilitation ”, enhancement of quality of academic
work (42.8 percent) and enhancement of research activ-
ity. Omotosho et al. (2015) confirm that distance learners
make use of ICT resources in their course work,assignments, group discussions and for information shar-
ing at the National Open University of Nigeria.
Furthermore, requiring students to use digital library
resources in their academic work can promote the use of
digital library resources (Huwiler 2016). In a study of the
information-seeking behaviour of distance education
graduate students at the Kent State University, Clark
(2014) found that most students were aware of available
digital resources. Specifically, 100 percent of the respon-
dents indicated their awareness of digital library
resources and that they had actually used journal data-
bases and full-text resources while 83 percent of the
students were aware of online reference databases, of
which 72 percent had actually used them as this was a
course requirement. On the contrary, other digital ser-
vices and resources such as the book delivery programme
was low on awareness (41 percent) and use (35 percent)
as there was no such requirement to use these for aca-
demic purposes. Natalee (2013) confirms that the use of e-
books increases when specifically prescribed by aca-
demic advisers to support online instruction.
Distance learners ’preference for the print format has
also been identified as a major factor for the lack of use of
digital library resources in distance education. Natalee
(2013) found that most distance learners at the Northern
Caribbean University prefer to use print formats of both
books and journals as opposed to electronic resources.
Explaining further, she reports that 42 percent of users
usually print out relevant pages of electronic journals or
books if they required further reading. The author is, there-
fore, of the view that libraries must provide both print and
electronic formats for all library users. This finding is,
however, at odds with other reports where preference for
print-based resources is not necessarily for convenience
but a manifestation of the challenges of integrating digital
resources into the curriculum. In a study to determine the
information-seeking behaviour of two categories of dis-
tance learners in Botswana, Oladokun (2010a) found that
distance learners rely heavily on their study packages and
modules (93.7 percent) which are print-based resources,
while the Internet (65.4 percent) and colleagues (62.9 per-
cent) were reported as being other preferred sources of
information for distance learners. Interestingly, only a
few (8.8 percent) indicated their preference for consulting
a subject librarian and by implication using any library-
based resource such as digital library resources. This result
is rarely surprising as the research setting of Botswana is a
developing country where challenges with Internet access,
high cost of broadband and unreliable power supply,
among others, are barriers to the use of digital information
(Alemna and Cobblah 2005).Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries 127
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMIn spite of the numerous resources available to enhance
access to quality information, distance learners ’preference
for the information source is usually not the library nor its
digital resources. A study by Oladokun (2010b) in Botswana
on the information-seeking behaviour of distance learners
indicates that books (90 percent) and lecturers (71.3 per-
cent) were the most predominant sources of information
used by distance learners. Again, the study sought to iden-
tify, through another follow-up question, the most valuable
information sources to students, who indicated their pre-
ference for books (45 percent) and lecturers (33.8 percent)
as most important. The author, however, clarifies that the
choice of “books ”as the most valuable information source
was related to their choice of the print format (study mod-
ules or packages) (71.3 percent) for their academic work and
not library textbooks as it may be assumed: the study also
found no preference at all for Internet resources among
distance learners for their academic work. The findings
from these studies seem to suggest that electronic resources
may not be preferred where the educational system does
not deliberately integrate electronic resources into teaching
and learning. In attempting to explain students ’dissatisfac-
tion with Internet resources, Oladokun (2010b) points out
that the students either lacked awareness of how to effec-
tively use Internet resources or lacked access to quality
educational digital libraries.
Training and skills acquisition are important aspects
in digital library development (Lighthart and Spreder
2014). In recognition of the critical role of lifelong learning
skills as a critical outcome of distance education, informa-
tion literacy has been used to promote the use of relevant
resources such as digital library services. The Association
of College and Research Libraries ’(ACRL) (2011) standards
for imparting information literacy skills has become an
important basis for institutions interested in promoting
lifelong learning among their students and other stake-
holders. Information literacy programmes are generally
expected to help users make effective and efficient use of
the information and information services offered by the
academic library (Mnkeni-Suarombe 2014). Information
literacy is now recognised by both educators and librar-
ians in distance education as a critical success factor in
teaching and learning (Moghaddam and Fard 2014).
Several strategies have been adopted by different
institutions to teach information literacy. In some institu-
tions, information literacy is implemented as an indepen-
dent course and in others integrated into the curriculum:
according to Bell (2008) these major strategies to deliver-
ing information literacy can be described as “compart-
mentalised ”or “distributed ”. The compartmentalised
model refers to standalone information literacy coursesthat may or may not attract credits. On the other hand,
the distributed model pertains to the approach of deliver-
ing information literacy where courses are integrated in
individual courses throughout the curriculum (Bell 2008;
cited in Gontshi and Owusu-Ansah 2015).
Jiyane and Onyancha (2010) examined information
science teaching departments (LIS) and academic
libraries in selected South African universities offering
information literacy programmes and identified that
most LIS departments were integrating information lit-
eracy within the several individual courses and most
were credit-bearing formal modules. On the other hand,
academic libraries offering information literacy courses
indicated they offered the courses as non-formal instruc-
tional programmes with emphasis on user education,
computer skills and library orientation. Both of the stra-
tegies have strengths and weaknesses: Jiyane and
Onyancha (2010) opine that integration may be counter-
productive as the subjects in which information literacy is
embedded may overshadow and dissipate the impact of
information literacy. Noting the benefits of integrating
information literacy within the curriculum, however,
Harrison and Rourke (2006) argue that integration
enables students to achieve advanced information lit-
eracy skills in the long-term by embedding information
literacy outcomes at the individual course level.
Whatever strategy is used in teaching information
literacy, Moghaddam and Fard (2014) believe that dis-
tance students choose distance education precisely for
its flexibility, meaning that supportive services should
offer the same degree of flexibility as much as possible.
As a result, the library community supporting distance
education advocates for alternative “fit-for-purpose ”
models for offering information literacy instruction (van
Brakel and Chisenga 2003). Mnkeni-Suarombe (2014) sup-
ports this view by arguing that information literacy in the
distance education context must be integrated into the
curriculum of distance learners, an action that may be
achieved through collaboration with faculty and other
campus stakeholders (Harrison and Rourke 2006). These
perspectives suggest a need for integrating information
literacy courses into the curriculum of distance learners
and that this will succeed with academic librarians for-
ging collaborations with academic partners.
Research Methodology
This research was conducted with a survey design using a
quantitative approach. The population of the study128 Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMconsisted of 1,834 distance education students who were
students of three distance education centres of the
University of Education, Winneba. In addition, the popu-
lation consisted of 30 distance education tutors each
from the three centres, three librarians from the three
centres and the University Librarian as well as the four
distance education coordinators who included the Head
of the Centre for Distance Education and three coordina-
tors from the three distance education centres.
Stratified purposive sampling was an important first
step in fulfilling the study objectives and this was
achieved by purposively sampling three distance educa-
tion centres where there were academic library services.
These centres are located in Winneba, Kumasi as well as
Asante-Mampong and incidentally are the location of
three out of four campuses of the University of
Education, Winneba. The sample size of the student
population was determined by applying the 95 percent
confidence level at a 5 percent confidence interval to
each of the sub-groups in the student population.
A questionnaire instrument was used for the study.
There were, however, two kinds of questionnaires: one
fully-structured questionnaire for distance learners and
two semi-structured questionnaires for the distance educa-
tion tutors and coordinators respectively. The question-
naire instrument was administered for a period of 4
months specifically from the month of March to June
2016. The researcher personally administered the question-
naire for the Kumasi centre which was located on the
Kumasi campus of the University while in the two other
centres colleagues who were staff of libraries in the two
other campuses, namely Asante-Mampong and Winneba,
assisted the researcher in administering the questionnaire.
Data analysis was completed with the current version
of the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS).
Data was presented through graphs (bar charts, histo-
grams and pictograms) and frequency distributions.
Again, the use of cross-tabulation and descriptive statis-
tics combined to establish distance learners ’and tutors ’
attitudes and perceptions towards digital library
resources.
Results of the Analysis
This section presents the findings of the empirical inves-
tigation. This includes the background of the respondents
which involves the study centres of the students, age and
gender composition as well as their levels of study.
Furthermore, findings related to the three research ques-
tions are presented.Background of the Participants
Distance learners were the primary population of the study
and their responses to digital libraries formed the basis of
much of the findings. From a sample population of 641
distance learners spread across the three centres, namely
Winneba (247), Kumasi (276) and Asante-Mampong (118), a
total of 453 distance learners completed the questionnaire,
yielding a response rate of 70.67 percent. Table 1 outlines
the distribution of the centres and distance learners who
participated in the study.
Table 2 presents the total number of participants of dis-
tance learners in the study according to their centres. The
distribution of distance learners among these three cen-
tres demonstrates that the majority (n = 195, 43 %) of the
participants were from the Winneba centre, whereas 181
(40 %) of the learners were located at the Kumasi study
centre and 77 (17 %) were drawn from the Asante-
Mampong centre. The results suggest that participation
of distance learners in the study was higher at the
Winneba study centre than in the other two centres.Table 1: Population of the study.
Distance study centre Distance education students
Population Sample size
Winneba  
Kumasi (UEW)  
Mampong  
Sub-Totals , 
Source: UEW Basic Statistics, (2015).
Table 2: Distance education centres and population of sampled
distance learners.
Centre Gender Total
Male Female
Winneba   
.% .% .%
Kumasi   
.% .% .%
Asante-Mampong   
.% .% .%
Total   
.% .% .%Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries 129
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMAge and Gender of Distance Learners
Distance learners who participated in the study were
expected to indicate their gender and age. Table 3 pre-
sents the gender and age of distance learners who parti-
cipated in the study:
Table 3 presents a cross-tabulation of the gender and age
distribution of the respondents. The results indicate that
females dominated in the study as more than half
(n = 254, 56.1 percent) of the learners were females com-
pared to 199 (43.9 percent) who were males and hence
that there was more female than male participation in the
study. This result suggests that women did not have
equal opportunities of undertaking full-time studies like
their male counterparts, probably because of their role in
attending to family responsibilities.
In relation to the age of distance learners, the study
also found that the majority (n = 262, 57.8 %) of the
respondents were aged between 21 and 30 years.
However, of this age group, there were more females
undertaking distance study (n = 156, 59.2 %) than males
(n = 106, 40.5 %), which can be explained in several
ways. It is clear that the majority of women in this age
group opt for distance education due to its flexible sche-
dule. Meanwhile, one-third (n = 141, 31.1 %) of the respon-
dents indicated they were aged from 31 to 40 years, while
the least represented age group is the 51 –60 year olds
who comprise just 1.5 percent of the total number of
participants, an indication that even though distance
education is preferred by adults the demanding nature
of distance study, it may be a disincentive to older indi-
viduals. It is therefore important that this negative per-
ception of distance education as heavily demanding is
alleviated with support services such as effective library
support in the form of digital library services.In addition to the distance learners ’population all 30
tutors, four coordinators and four librarians who partici-
pated in the study returned validly completed semi-struc-
tured questionnaires, giving a response rate of 100
percent respectively.
Distance Learners ’Levels of Study
Another important variable of distance learners deter-
mined in the study was their levels of study. Awareness
of the levels of study of students may help to determine
their academic information needs which may further
determine their library use and needs. The findings of
the specific level of study of respondents are presented in
Table 4 below.
The outcome of this investigation indicates that more
than half (n = 246, 58 percent) of the respondents were
in their third (3rd) year of study whereas 176 (41.7 per-
cent) were in their fourth (4th) year of study. The results
show that the majority of gender disparities observed in
the data were in their 3rd year.
To What Extent do Academic Tasks Influence
the Use of Digital Libraries by Distance
Learners?
A better approach to assessing learners ’behavioural ten-
dencies towards the use of digital library resources is to find
out the purposes for which they seek to use digital library
resources. Table 5 is a summary of responses of distance
learners ’purposes for using digital library resources.
The results in Table 5 indicate that most learners use
digital library resources during the writing of theirTable 3: Gender and age distribution of distance learners.
Gender. Age group. Total.
–
yrs.–
yrs.–
yrs.–
yrs.
Male     
.% .% .% .% .%
Female     
.% .% .% .% .%
Total     
.% .% .% .%.%
Source: Field survey, 2016.Table 4: Levels of study of distance learners.
Level of study Gender Total
Male Female
rd year Degree/Post –Diploma   
.% .% .%
th year Degree/Post –Diploma   
.% .% .%
Total   
.% .% .%
Source: Field survey, 2016.130 Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMresearch projects in the final year of study (m = 3.29,
n = 184). In addition, other learners reported using digital
resources when working on their assignments (m = 3.87,
n = 184), although it must be pointed out that distance
learners are not given assignments in this programme,
while other groups of distance learners also use digital
library resources when searching for current and general
information (m = 3.91, n = 102). Finally, some of the lear-
ners noted they use digital library resources when pre-
paring lesson plans, evidenced with a mean score of
(m = 4.00, n = 104).
To confirm the responses of the distance learners on
the purposes for which they use digital libraries, the
views of coordinators were obtained. Most of the coordi-
nators were of the view that distance learners use digital
library resources when writing their final year research
projects (m = 2.00, ± SD = 0.14) while some also believed
distance learners use digital resources when writing the-
sis and dissertations (m = 1.50, ± SD = 0.057). The findings
from coordinators support the view that distance learners
predominantly use digital library resources for their pro-
ject work.
In addition, tutors also indicated that distance lear-
ners were required to use digital resources when doing
their research projects (n = 5), whereas two tutors each
indicated essay and reading assignments respectively:
hence, by implication, they revealed that students ’
research work requires use of digital library resources
for information. Four tutors stated that they do not give
their learners assignments, implying the nature of the
distance education programme as one that rarely
encourages the use of library resources including digital
resources. This approach to distance education does not
give opportunities to students to learn to independently
find scholarly information, which is increasingly avail-
able through digital libraries. It is important to note that
there are digital library resources appropriate for alllearning outcomes in the curriculum. From the findings,
it may therefore be deduced that digital library resources
are not used throughout the academic work of distance
learners.
To What Extent Does the Use of Print
Sources Influence the Use of Digital Libraries
by Distance Learners?
In spite of distance learners ’indication of Web-search
engines as their most used digital information resource,
it may not be their best source of academic information
overall. As a follow-up to the previous question, distance
learners were asked to indicate their most preferred
source of information. Table 6 depicts distance learners ’
responses.
A summary of the responses as indicated in Table 6
revealed that Distance Education Modules (m = 2.79,
n = 272) turned up as the most preferred source of infor-
mation by the distance learners. The Internet was ranked
as the second most preferred source of information
(m = 3.10, n = 233), followed by lecture notes (m = 3.60,
n = 164). Library resources (m = 3.89, n = 123) and collea-
gues (m = 3.97, n = 105) were the lowest ranked preferred
choice of sources of information preferred by distance
learners.
These results from the distance learners were con-
firmed by distance education tutors who were asked to
indicate the resources mostly referenced by their learners.
The results suggest that about half (n = 16, 53.3 percent)
of the learners refer to their modules most, whereas 9 (30
percent) of the tutors indicated that their learners refer-
ence textbooks, while 3 (10 percent) of the tutors also
pointed out that their learners reference academic data-
bases. The outcome indicates that distance learners pre-
fer to use printed modules and textbooks as their mainTable 5: The purpose for which distance learners use digital library
resources.
Ranks Mean Rank Freq. (n)
Writing projects . 
Assignment . 
Current and general information . 
Preparing lesson plans . 
Leisure . 
All of the above . 
Writing thesis/dissertation . 
Source: Field survey, 2016.
Table 6: Distance learners ’preferred sources of information.
Ranks Mean rank Freq. (n)
Distance education modules . 
Internet . 
Lecture notes . 
Reference textbooks . 
Library resources . 
Colleagues . 
Source: Field survey, 2016.Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries 131
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMsources of reference in their academic activities, unsur-
prising since tutors have a stronger preference for printed
modules (20 percent) among a list of both print and
digital resources.
To What Extent Does Information Skills
Training Influence the Use of Digital
Libraries in the Distance Education
Programme?
The aim of this research question was to find out how
information skills training improves the confidence
and competencies of students in using digital resources.
Table 7 includes the kinds of training students have
received to improve their information skills.
Results in Table 7 shows that whereas 228 students
(50.3 percent) reported receiving training in internet search-
ing, 131 (28.9 percent) had received training on electronic
databases, with library user education the least amount of
training received (122 = 26.9 percent). On the other hand, as
many as 279 students (61.6 percent) reported not being
trained in the use of electronic databases.
These findings from the students were confirmed by all
four coordinators of the distance education programme,
that distance learners are provided ICT skills training in
their centres. In explaining the nature of this training,
some coordinators said that “the ICT courses are run for
all students of the university, whether it is a distance
student or full-time student ”. Elsewhere, when discussing
the types of specific topics included in the training, one
coordinator remarked that “the students offer courses in
ICT tutorial and Microsoft applications ”. In addition, with
librarians ’admission that they do not engage withdistance learners, it can be assumed that the 28.9 percent
of students who reported being trained in electronic data-
bases were either not being truthful or had prior training
from elsewhere.
Discussions of Findings
This section is a discussion of the findings of the study in
relation to the research questions and the extant litera-
ture. The discussion is in order of the influence of aca-
demic tasks, print resources and information skills on the
use of digital library resources in distance education.
Influence of Academic Tasks on the
Use of Digital Library Services
In respect of whether or not academic tasks influence the
use of digital library resources, the study found that the
academic tasks of distance learners are not connected to
the use of library resources. Furthermore, tutors ’and
coordinators ’perspectives of distance learners ’purposes
for using digital libraries reveal that distance learners are
not required to use digital library resources in their learn-
ing activities. Our study ’s finding affirms that of Larson
and Owusu-Acheaw (2016) who found that distance lear-
ners of the University of Education, Winneba (Winneba
Study Centre) did not make use of library resources in
their academic work. This result is, however, in contrast
to Tury, Robinson, and Bawden (2015) who found in their
study that distance learners ’use of library resources were
task-based, with the majority of their respondents requir-
ing library information sources in preparing for their
exams, completing assignments or course work. Linking
resources to academic tasks is considered a critical factor
for students ’intention to use digital library resources (Joo
and Choi 2015). According to Joo and Choi (2015), stu-
dents must be encouraged by their academic mentors,
including their professors, to use library resources by
demonstrating to them the value of these resources.
Even though digital library resources are useful for a
variety of purposes, its superior value for learning must
be emphasised, which will be achieved through the appli-
cation of new pedagogical methods such as promoting
inquiry-based learning through the rich sources of the
digital library (Sharifabadi 2006). A number of authors
are of the view that students ’use of library resources can
only be improved through collaboration with academicTable 7: Training in digital library resources.
Programmes Response
Yes No No response
Freq.
(n)% Freq.
(n)% Freq.
(n)%
Library user
education  .   .    .
How to use electronic
databases  .   .   .
Internet searching
skills  .   .    .
Source: Field survey 2016.132 Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMpartners by systematically integrating library instruction
into the curriculum and indicating how academic
tasks are linked to library resources (Joo and Choi 2015,
2016; Sullo et al. 2012; Tang and Tseng 2016).
Influence of Print Sources on the
Use of Digital Library Services
In terms of the information format preferences of distance
learners, the study found that most of the distance lear-
ners preferred information sources in print, a result
which is supported in the literature (Mizrachi 2016;
Oladokun 2010b) (Oladokun found that most (71.3 per-
cent) distance learners in his study preferred the print
format). In exploring reasons for these preferences,
Mizrachi (2016) attributes students ’preference for print
resources to the less distractive nature of books and the
efficiency of books for academic reading, while it can
also be surmised that distance learners in the study are
more familiar with print sources than with digital
sources. Joo and Choi (2015) also found that familiarity
with resources plays a significant role in students ’inten-
tion to use digital library resources. Even though Joo and
Choi were concerned with librarians designing library
interfaces that were compatible with students ’existing
preferences, it can be understood that students prefer
print sources in a library for extensive studying purposes
and so it is prudent for librarians to ensure that digital
libraries provide facilities make it possible to access print
resources. Mizrachi (2016) avers that librarians should
provide print versions of digital resources which often
require extensive focused reading, which distance lear-
ners may access through innovative document delivery
services such as OPACS (Diaz 2012) and in-person
requests. Better still, the provision of superior e-book
readers may attract distance learners to use digital
libraries (Vasileiou, Rowley, and Hartley 2012).
Influence of Information Skills on
the Use of Digital Library Services
Distance learners require constant training in digital
library resources since these are not usually one of the
academic resources students use. Findings on the kinds
of training received in digital library use were important
to understand students ’present attitude to digitalresources. In respect of this, the findings revealed that
in terms of training, most of them had not received any
library user education (53.2 percent) and training on the
use of electronic databases (61.6 percent), while 26.9
percent and 28.9 percent claimed to have received train-
ing in library use and electronic resources respectively.
On the other hand, most distance learners (50.3 percent)
reported being trained in Internet searching, while
another 39.3 percent claimed not being trained in this
area. The results on library use training and electronic
resources from distance learners ’points of view are a
reflection of librarians ’responses on training of distance
learners. Librarians who were interviewed indicated that
they had no training programme for distance learners,
their tutors and coordinators, while distance education
coordinators also provided a rationale to some of the
findings. In their responses on training, all four coordi-
nators revealed that ICT training was offered at their
centers. All first-year students in the university are
offered a general ICT course also available to distance
learners, suggesting movement in the right direction for
information literacy as a course to be taught to distance
learners as well to enhance their skills in using digital
libraries. Oladokun (2010a) supports this view by reveal-
ing that computer and information literacy are compul-
sory courses for all first-year distance students in two
satellite campuses in Botswana.
Conclusion and Recommendations
T h ep u r p o s eo ft h i ss t u d yw a st op r e s e n tp a r to ft h e
findings of a large study which examined the use of
digital libraries in a teacher distance education pro-
gramme. This particular article focuses on individual
factors influencing the use of digital libraries by dis-
tance learners at the University of Education, Winneba
in Ghana. The study found that the academic tasks of
distance learners in the study did not require them to
use digital library resources: furthermore, it was dis-
covered that the high preference for print resources
among distance learners resulted in low patronage of
digital library resources as distance learners find print
sources more convenient to use. Finally, the study
found that most distance learners had not received
any training on the use of digital library resources
and this negatively affected t heir use of digital library
resources.
Academic libraries in dual-mode institutions must
embrace collaboration with their distance educationChristopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries 133
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMcounterparts in order to make their services visible and
useful to distance learners. It is, therefore, recommended
that academic librarians seek and foster collaboration in
teaching information literacy and library instruction in
distance education. The aim of this collaboration is to
integrate information literacy across the curriculum and
be partners in the classroom, which must be backed by a
policy requiring the use of (digital) library information
resources in teaching and learning in distance education.
This policy must be developed by the academic library
and distance education authorities and submitted to uni-
versity authorities subsequently. The goal of this policy
may be achieved through collaboration between librar-
ians, distance education authorities and other stake-
holders in developing new teaching and learning
strategies that foster independent learning.
Again, it must be recognised that the provision of
skills and training go hand in hand with the effective
use of technological tools. Digital library managers must
collaborate with distance education administrators and
faculty to design training programmes for students and
faculty in distance education. Following this stage, three
major training methods may be used for training distance
learners in digital library resources. The first is a stand-
alone, separate and compulsory university-approved
information literacy course which will, among other
topics, introduce students to the range of digital library
resources available in the library (this course will also be
available for full-time first year students of the univer-
sity). In addition, teaching librarians will be expected to
demonstrate practically how to use these resources in
their scholarly activities. Secondly, we recommend a digi-
tal resource-specific training programme which will be in
the form of a workshop or seminar for distance learners
on a regular basis, for instance once every semester.
Lastly, online information literacy tutorials, with specific
focus on digital resources and how to use them, may be
provided on the library website with links to the learning
management system used by students of the university to
enhance and promote lifelong learning and independent
self-paced learning.
References
Abdelrahman, O. H. 2012. “A Basic Hybrid Library Support Model to
Distance Learners in Sudan. ”Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science 44 (1): 19 –26.
Alemna, A., and M. Cobblah. 2005. “Relevant Issues in the Provision
of Digital Information in Africa. ”Library Hi Tech News 22 (9):
L18–20.Alfrih, F. M. 2010. “The Role of Academic Libraries in Supporting
Distance Learning in Saudi Higher Education: A Case Study
Approach. ”Unpublished thesis, Loughborough University.
Association of College & Research Libraries (ACRL), 2011.
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher
Education. Available at: http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/
informationliteracycompetency (accessed 13 July 2016).
Bell, S. 2008. “IL Course Credit does not Equal Credibility. ”
Accessed April 28, 2015. http://acrlog.org/2008/11/25/il-
course-credit-does-not-equal-credibility.
Brooke, C., P. McKinney, and A. Donoghue. 2013. “Provision of
Distance Learner Support Services at UK Universities:
Identification of Best Practice and Institutional Case Study. ”
Library Trends 61 (3): 613 –635.
Calhoun, K. (2014). Exploring digital libraries: foundations, practice,
prospects . London: Facet Publishing.
Clark, J. C. 2014. “Information-Seeking Behaviour and Library Use by
Distance Education Graduate Music Education Students. ”
Music Reference Services Quarterly 17 (4): 207 –225.
Damilola, O. A. 2013. “Use of Electronic Resources by Distance
Students in Nigeria: The Case of the National Open University,
Lagos and Ibadan Study Centres. ”Library Philosophy and
Practice (e-journal) . Paper 915.
Diaz, C. 2012. “Academic Library Services to Distance Learners: In
Consideration of Costs, Technology, and Stability. ”Urban
Library Journal 18 (1): 1 –16.
Fox, E. A., M. A. Gonçalves, and N. A. Kipp. 2002. “Digital Libraries. ”
InHandbook on Information Technologies for Education and
Training , In Springer series “International Handbook on
Information Systems ”, edited by H. Adelsberger, B. Collis and J.
Pawlowski, 623 –641. Berlin: Springer.
Gontshi, V. & Owusu-Ansah, C.M. (2015). Implementing information
literacy through the personal librarian model: prospects and
challenges. Journal of Balkan Libraries Union 3 (2): 28 –35.
Harrison, J., and L. Rourke. 2006. “The Benefits of Buy ‐In:
Integrating Information Literacy into Each Year of an
Academic Programme. ”Reference Services Review 34 (4):
599 –606.
Henning, J. C. 2010. “Management of Open Distance Libraries with
Reference to Learner Support. ”Library Management 31 (6):
440 –450.
Hill, J. B., H. Li, and C. Macheak. 2013. “Current Practices in Distance
Learning Library Services at Urban and Metropolitan
Universities. ”Journal of Library & Information Services in
Distance Learning 7 (3): 313 –322.
Huwiler, A. G. 2016. “Library Services for Distance Students:
Opportunities and Challenges Library Services for Distance
Students. ”Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance
Learning 9 (4): 275 –288.
Jiyane, G. V., and O. B. Onyancha. 2010. “Information Literacy
Education and Instruction in Academic Libraries and LIS
Schools in Institutions of Higher Education in South Africa. ”
South African Journal of Libraries and Information Science
76 (1): 11 –23.
Joo, S., & Choi, N. 2016. “Understanding Users ’Continuance
Intention to Use Online Library Resources Based on an
Extended Expectation-Confirmation Model. ”The Electronic
Library , 34 (4): 554 –571.
Larson, A. G., and M. Owusu-Acheaw. 2016. “Information Needs of
Distance Learners: A Case of Winneba Study Center, University134 Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AMof Education, Winneba, Ghana. ”Turkish Online Journal of
Distance Education 17 (3): 62 –75.
Lighthart, M., and C. Spreder. 2014. “Partners in Lifelong Learning. ”
Knowledge Quest 42 (4): 32 –37.
Liu, Z., and Y. L. Yang. 2004. “Factors Influencing Distance-Education
Graduate Students ’Use of Information Sources: A User Study. ”
The Journal of Academic Librarianship 30 (1): 24 –35.
Martey, A. 2004. “ICT in Distance Education in Ghana. ”Library Hi
Tech News 21 (5): 16 –18.
Mizrachi, D. 2016. “Buy, Borrow, or Access Online? Format Behaviors
among College Freshmen in a Reading-Intensive Course. ”
Reference Services Review 44 (4): 583 –595.
Mnkeni-Suarombe, N. 2014. “Information Literacy: A Cornerstone for
Open Distance Learning at the University of South Africa. ”
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 47 (2): 1 –10.
Moghaddam, H. S., and E. M. Fard. 2014. “Information Literacy in
Distance Education Universities in Iran: A Case Study of
Payame Noor University. ”International Journal of Information
Science & Management 12 (1): 65 –75.
Natalee, K. 2013. “Enhancing Access to Library Resources at
Northern Caribbean University through an e-Library Initiative. ”
The Electronic Library 31 (6): 753 –769.
Ng, S. N. 2013. “Finding my Way Around: The Information Process of
Distance Students when Searching for Free Online Resources,
1–12.”Accessed November 20, 2016. http://library.ifla.org/
212/1/144-ng-en.pdf.
Okello ‐Obura, C. 2010. “Assessment of the Problems LIS Postgraduate
Students Face in Accessing E ‐Resources in Makerere University,
Uganda. ”Collection Building 29 (3): 98 –105.
Oladokun, O. 2010a. “A Comparison of the Information Seeking
Pattern of Distance Learners in Botswana: A Case Study of Four
Tertiary Institutions. ”Journal of Library & Information Services
in Distance Learning 4 (3): 119 –136.
Oladokun, O. 2010b. “Information Seeking Behavior of the Off-
Campus Students at the University of Botswana: A Case of Two
Satellite Centers. ”Journal of Library Administration
50 (7/8): 883 –898.
Oladokun, O. 2014. “The Information Environment of Distance
Learners: A Literature Review. ”Creative Education
2014 5: 303 –317.
Omotosho, A. O., E. B. Lateef, O. I. Amusa, and T. M. Bello. 2015.
“Information and Communication Technology Adoption and Use
among Students of a Nigerian University for Distance Learning. ”
Library Philosophy and Practice (e-journal) . Paper 1246.
Owusu-Mensah, F., Anyan, J. A., & Denkyi, C. (2015). “Staff
Development Practices of Open and Distance LearningInstitutions in Ghana: The Case of the Distance Education
Programme of University of Education, Winneba, Ghana. ”
Journal of Education and Practice , 6 (14): 79 –86.
Poellhuber, B., T. Anderson, N. Racette, and L. Upton. 2013.
“Distance Students ’Readiness for and Interest in Collaboration
and Social Media. ”Interactive Technology and Smart Education
10 (1): 63 –78.
Sander, H., van Vuren, A. & du Plessis, T. 2006. Library live:
embedding and contextualising information resources in the
virtual learning environment, IATUL Annual Conference
Proceedings, 16, (1 –9). Available at: "http://www.iatul.org/
doclibrary/public/Conf_"www.iatul.org/doclibrary/public/
Conf_ Proceedings/2006/vanVurenSanderpaper.pdf (accessed
10 November 2015).
Sharifabadi, S. R. 2006. “How Digital Libraries Can Support
E-Learning. ”The Electronic Library 24 (3): 389 –401.
Shih, J., G. Hwang, Y. Chu, and C. Chuang. 2011. “An Investigation-
Based Learning Model for Using Digital Libraries to Support
Mobile Learning Activities. ”The Electronic Library 29 (4):
488 –505.
Sullo, E., Harrod, T., Butera, G., & Gomes, A. 2012. “Rethinking
Library Service to Distance Education Students: Analyzing the
Embedded Librarian Model. ”Medical Reference Services
Quarterly 31 (1): 25 –33.
Tang, Y., & Tseng, H. W. 2016. “Distance Learners ’Self-efficacy and
Information Literacy Skills. ”The Journal of Academic
Librarianship 39 (6): 517 –521.
Tedd, L. A., and A. Large. 2005. Digital Libraries: Principles and
Practice in a Global Environment . Munchen: Saur Verlag.
Tury, S., L. Robinson, and D. Bawden. 2015. “The Information-
Seeking Behaviour of Distance Learners: A Case Study of the
University of London International Programmes. ”Journal of
Academic Librarianship 41 (3): 312 –321.
University of Education Winneba. 2017. Diary . Winneba: Author.
University of Education Winneba Website. 2015. About us . Accessed
December 20, 2016. http://www.uew.edu.gh/aboutus.
van Brakel, P. A., and J. Chisenga. 2003. “Impact of ICT ‐based
Distance Learning: The African Story. ”The Electronic Library
21 (5): 476 –486.
Vasileiou, M., J. Rowley, and R. Hartley. 2012. “Perspectives on the
Future of E-Books in Libraries in Universities. ”Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science 44 (4): 217 –226.
Zha, X., W. Wang, Y. Yan, J. Zhang, and D. Zha. 2015. “Understanding
Information Seeking in Digital Libraries: Antecedents and
Consequences. ”Aslib Journal of Information Management
67 (6): 715 –734.Christopher M. Owusu-Ansah et al.: Factors Influencing the Use of Digital Libraries 135
Brought to you by | Washington University in St. Louis
Authenticated
Download Date | 6/10/18 5:40 AM