FUTURE of  FOOD 
Harnessing Digital Technologies to  
Improve Food System Outcomes
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized© 2019 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW 
Washington DC 20433 Telephone: 202-473-1000 Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and 
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. 
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, 
and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions 
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this 
work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given. 
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World 
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Authors
Robert Townsend, Julian Lampietti, David Treguer, Kateryna Schroeder, Mekbib Haile, Armine Juergenliemk, Eva Hasiner, 
Alexandra Horst, Artavazd Hakobyan with inputs from Panos Varangis, Diego Arias, Luda Bujoreanu, Jeehye Kim, Erick Fernandes, Parmesh Shah, Dina Umali-Deininger, Michael Morris, Flore de Preneuf, Marianne Fay, Jean Saint-Geours, Anup Jagwani, Gene Moses, Ernest Bethe, Marta Bogdanic, Michel Rogy, Jane Treadwell, Raman Krishnan, Katie Kennedy Freeman, Joanne Gaskell, Mercedes Stickler, Ashwini Sebastian, Hyea Won Lee, Nadim Khouri, Li Guo, and Astrid Jakobs de Padua. Overall guidance was provided by Juergen Voegele, Martien van Nieuwkoop, and Simeon Ehui.
Images
Front cover:  Flore de Preneuf/World Bank
Title page:  Flore de Preneuf/World Bank
Interior:  2, Dominic Chavez/World Bank
   5, Bart Verweij/World Bank
   9, Mai Ky/World Bank
   10, Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank
   18, Tom Perry/World Bank
   30, Neil Palmer/CIAT
   31, Neil Palmer/CIAT
   33, Maria Fleischmann/World Bank
   34, Chhor Sokunthea/World Bank
   40, Neil Palmer/CIATApril 2019FUTURE of FOOD
Harnessing Digital T echnologies to  
Improve Food System Outcomes3
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESFOREWORD
New and expanding information and com-
munications technologies are bringing 
far-reaching change across the globe. Yet, 
these advances have recently coincided with a slowing of global poverty reduction, an 
increase in global hunger, and persistent nat-
ural resource degradation. How can we better harness the impact of digital technologies to 
tackle the world’s pressing sustainable devel-
opment challenges? 
Improving the performance of the food system is a central part of reaching the 
Sustainable Development Goals. That’s 
because the food system provides nourish
-
ment and supports livelihoods for most of the world’s poor and better management 
of the system could strengthen the stew
-
ardship of the world’s natural resources. 
Improvements in food system performance 
are associated with dramatic declines 
in poverty, hunger and natural resource degradation.
Over half of the world’s population now has access to the internet and over 5 billion peo-
ple subscribe to mobile phone services. Most 
people without access live in rural areas. Where there is coverage, adoption is of-
ten low due to factors such as cost, lack of 
knowledge and skills, and mistrust.The World Bank Group is strongly commit-ted to expanding digital opportunity for all, 
including for farmers and agribusiness. And 
we can do more to help countries use digital technologies to improve their food system 
outcomes in rural and urban areas. 
This report looks at the opportunities from 
digital technologies, including better trans-
parency of agricultural value chains, smarter farms, and improved public services. It also 
reviews some of the risks, including an 
over-concentration of service provider market power, poor data governance, and 
exclusion. It presents a set of potential entry 
points for public sector action to seize the opportunities that expanding rural network 
coverage can bring while fostering digital 
entrepreneurship and facilitating demand. 
This report offers an opportunity to broaden the discussion on ways to more rapidly spread 
digital dividends and drive policy and invest
-
ments that can deliver positive impacts for 
the food system, people and the environment. 
Laura Tuck
Vice President, Sustainable Development
World Bank  
4
FUTURE OF FOODKey messages
• Digital technologies—tools that collect, store, analyze, and share information digitally, 
including mobile phones and the Internet—have significant potential to improve effi-
ciency, equity, and environmental sustainability in the food system. They can: significantly 
reduce the costs of linking sellers and buyers; reduce inequalities in access to information, knowledge, technologies, and markets; help farmers make more precise decisions on re-
source management by providing, processing, and analyzing an increasing amount of data 
faster; and potentially reduce scale economies in agriculture, thereby making small-scale producers more competitive. 
• A range of digital technologies in the food system are already leading to: better informed 
and engaged consumers and producers, smarter farms, and improved public services. These 
technologies range from simple off-line farmer advisory digital videos to complex systems requiring higher levels of mobile phone and Internet connectivity, such as distributed 
ledger technologies for value chain traceability and some forms of precision agriculture.
• Adoption of digital technologies varies significantly across countries, with lower current 
adoption rates in low-income countries. Increasing adoption of digital technologies in the food system will require addressing supply-side factors—such as rural network cover-
age and availability of digital applications—and demand-side factors, including skills and 
knowledge, trust, affordability, and complementary investments. Addressing these factors will require a range of public policy actions including increasing the space for private 
sector activity, improving the policy and regulatory environment, and using public invest-
ments to help crowd-in private sector investment.
• While digital technologies have significant potential they also pose several risks, includ-ing: an overconcentration of service provider market power; lack of data privacy; exclusion 
and potential job losses for some activities; and cybersecurity breaches. These risks cut 
across all segments of the economy, including the food system. Addressing these risks calls for public policy to: keep service provider entry barriers low; ensure good data governance; 
foster inclusion through targeted support to smallholder farmers, youth, women, and other 
vulnerable groups; and support skills development. 
• While digital technologies offer significant opportunities to improve food system out-comes, they should not be viewed as a panacea. Other investments are needed to address 
the multiple constraints farmers face such as roads, energy, post-harvest storage, and lo-
gistics that can better link farmers to markets. Countries can also make policy improve-ments to increase incentives for farmers and agribusinesses to invest in farms and across 
agricultural value chains. These investments and policy improvements may in turn increase 
demand for digital technologies. 5
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESWhy harnessing digital technologies to improve food 
system outcomes matters
The food system needs to play an active role 
in accelerating progress on ending pov-
erty and hunger, contributing to growth 
and jobs, and better stewardship of the world’s natural resources if the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) are to be 
achieved. 
• Ending poverty: The pace of global 
poverty reduction slowed to 0.6 percent 
between 2013 and 2015, well below the 
25-year average decline of 1 percent per 
year.
1 This slowdown puts at risk achieve-
ment of the SDG target to end poverty 
by 2030. In 2015, 736 million people, 
10 percent of the world’s population, were living on less than US$1.90 per day, 
of which 79 percent lived in rural areas 
and most relied on agriculture for their livelihoods.
2 While some of the poor will 
migrate to urban areas by 2030, most will 
not, and will continue to rely on income generation from rural activities on farms 
and along agricultural value chains. Lifting this population segment out of 
extreme poverty by 2030 will require 
average income gains of at least 60 per-cent in Sub-Saharan Africa, and at least 
30 percent in Asia.
• Ending hunger, and improving nu-trition and human capital: Between 
2015 and 2017, the number of people affected by hunger rose by 36.4 million, 
to 821 million.
3 In addition, more than 
2 billion people are deficient in key vita-mins and minerals necessary for growth, 
development, and disease prevention.
4 
Energy and micronutrient deficiency 
contribute to the 151 million children 
under age five who are stunted and can-not grow to achieve their full potential. At 
the same time more than 2 billion adults 
are overweight and obese,
5 increasing the 6
FUTURE OF FOODrisk of non-communicable diseases such 
as Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, heart 
attacks, and certain cancers. Furthermore, 
one person in 10 is impacted by contam-inated food.
6
• Contributing to growth, providing more and better jobs, and boosting 
shared prosperity: As countries become 
richer, per capita expenditures on food tend to rise, even as their share in house-
hold expenditures declines. With rising 
incomes, diets change and the share of in-come spent on cereals declines relative to 
other fresh, processed, and convenience 
foods. This change leads to increased food management and transformation beyond 
the farm, which have a multiplier effect 
in creating new enterprise growth op-portunities and jobs in the broader food 
system. Farming (or agriculture) still em-
ploys more people than any other sector in many countries, accounting for an esti-
mated 67 percent of total employment in 
low-income countries.
7 The food system 
also accounts for a large share of manu-
facturing and services jobs. For example, 
in Malawi and Tanzania, food and bever-ages account for more than 40 percent of 
total manufacturing employment.
8 Even 
in the European Union (EU), the food and beverage industry represents a larger 
share of employment than other manu-facturing sectors.
9
• Better stewardship of the world’s natu -
ral resources: Global agricultural produc -
tion practices are currently unsustainable. The annual cost of land degradation is 
about US$300 billion per year,
10 about 
one-third of the world’s largest aquifers are being depleted,
11 and agricultural pollution is on the rise.12 Under current 
practices, greenhouse gas (GHG) emis -
sions from agriculture and land use 
change are projected to represent 70 per -
cent of total allowable emissions from all economic sectors to limit global warming 
to 1.5°C by 2050.
13 If climate change goes 
unmitigated, the total days under drought conditions are projected to increase by 
more than 20 percent in some regions.
14 
Further, food that is harvested but then 
lost or wasted occupies total arable land 
equal in size to China, consumes about 25 percent of all water used in agriculture 
each year, and accounts for about 8 per
-
cent of global GHG emissions.
Characteristics of the food 
system make it ripe for expanded use of digital solutions 
The food system has several characteristics 
that offer significant potential for digital 
solutions to have positive impacts:
• Large and complex, with many actors: 
The global food system is complex, in-
volving many actors exchanging vast amounts of information. It comprises 
about 100,000 enterprises supplying in-
puts such as seeds, fertilizers, machinery, animal health services, crop and livestock 
insurance, finance, and livestock feed 
to 570 million farms around the world, many in remote areas. And millions of 
informal and formal enterprises move, 
process, and sell agricultural outputs to 7.5 billion consumers. Digital technol-
ogies have the potential to significantly 7
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESreduce the costs of linking these actors in 
the food system, more efficiently match-
ing buyers and sellers; and helping to 
better target poor and vulnerable farmers with support services.
• Large inefficiencies: The food system’s 
inefficiencies are reflected in its un-
sustainable use of land and water, and significant food loss and waste. Food 
production, as a biological process, re-quires many decision points that affect production efficiency, such as what and 
when to plant; and what, how much, 
when, and where to apply fertilizer and water optimally, which depend on other 
factors such as soil type, soil moisture, 
and weather forecasts. In this data-inten-sive process, farmer decision making on 
resource management can be improved 
by processing and analyzing more data faster, particularly considering the impact 
of climate change.
• Asymmetric access to technologies, 
knowledge, information, and markets lead to lack of equal opportunity, and con-
tribute to poverty and hunger, inequality, 
and unstainable use of natural resources. Digital technologies can potentially re-
duce inequalities in access to information, 
knowledge, technologies, and markets. 
Digital technologies have been spreading rapidly across various sectors and regions, driven by lower costs, better connectivity, 
and advanced analytics. Network coverage 
and mobile phone use has increased sig-nificantly in recent years. As of 2017, there 
were 5 billion unique mobile subscribers 
(66 percent of the world’s population), and 3.3 billion mobile Internet users (43 percent of the world’s population).
15 Sub-Saharan 
Africa was the only region with mobile sub-
scriber and mobile Internet penetration rates 
significantly lower than the global aggre-gate, with rates of 44 percent and 21 percent, 
respectively.
16 While there has been a sig-
nificant expansion of network coverage beyond urban areas, the vast majority of the 
1.2 billion people worldwide not covered by a broadband-capable network live in rural 
areas.
17 Advances in analytics are transform-
ing enormous amounts of digital data into useable form for decision makers. Over the 
past 10 years, agriculture has experienced re-markable growth in ag-tech
18 investments, 
with US$6.7 billion invested in the past five 
years,19 most of which has been in developed 
countries. However, agriculture is currently the slowest sector in terms of adopting dig-
ital technologies, according to McKinsey’s Industry Digitization Index.
20 
Digital technologies have the potential to improve efficiency, equity, nutrition 
and health, and sustainability of the food 
system. In terms of efficiency, digital tech
-
nologies can: (i) improve the use of capital, including machinery and equipment, in the 
food system, thereby increasing its technical 
and allocative efficiency; (ii) facilitate the ac
-
quisition of skills and knowledge needed for agricultural production, thereby improving 
labor efficiency and the optimal use of in
-
puts; (iii) improve farmers’ decision making 
through accurate, timely, and location-spe -
cific price, weather, and agronomic data and information that will become increasingly 
important in the context of climate change; 
and (iv) reduce costs associated with match
-
ing producers and consumers, which will help expand output markets and improve 8
FUTURE OF FOODproducer access to inputs. Improved produc -
tion decision and production efficiency can 
improve farmer profits. In terms of improving 
equity, digital technologies have the poten -
tial to address unequal access to information, 
knowledge, technologies, and markets, and 
thereby improve relative incomes of poor 
people. In terms of improving nutrition and health, in one recent study, the use of mo
-
bile phones was associated with increases in household income, gender equality, and food 
and nutrition security. Positive nutrition ef
-
fects occurred primarily through income and 
gender equality pathways.21 In addition, dig -
itally-enabled improved traceability can help increase food safety, with positive health ef
-
fects. As regards environmental sustainability of the food system, digital technologies can 
improve use of natural capital such as wa
-
ter and land, and improve the use of inputs, 
such as fertilizers. For example, remote sens -
ing technologies can measure water use and monitor net withdrawal of groundwater, 
which can help determine sustainable use tar
-
gets for better irrigation water management. 
While digital technologies have many po-
tential advantages, they also present risks 
that will need to be monitored and ad-
dressed to ensure broad benefits. The World Bank’s World Development Report 
2016 on the “Digital Dividend” details sev-
eral risks, including: inequality of access and affordability; concentration of market power 
as regards e-commerce platforms, social net-
works, and search engines; issues related to data privacy, ownership and consumer pro-
tection; and cybersecurity breaches. These 
risks apply also to the food system. Two risks—inequality of access and data priva-
cy—are highlighted here, and with market concentration, are addressed in more detail in subsequent sections of the paper.
• Inequality of access: Digital technologies 
have the potential to reduce inequalities 
in the food system but may also poten -
tially widen inequality. Uneven connec -
tivity and broadband infrastructure lead 
to unequal opportunity. If digital tech -
nologies require more specific skills, the benefits may accrue disproportionately to 
those farmers that are positioned to take 
advantage of such opportunities.
22,23,24 If 
digital technologies require substantial 
investments, small-scale farmers may be 
excluded from their adoption and may see their relative competitiveness decrease. 
Costs of entry for some value chains may 
increase. For example, if retailers require suppliers of fresh produce such as leafy 
greens to apply real-time traceability us
-
ing blockchain technology to increase 
response times in case of food-borne ill -
ness, supplier entry costs will rise, and those unable to meet those requirements 
will be excluded. The gender divide may 
also widen due to men’s generally stronger socio-cultural access to new technologies 
than women. Even in richer countries, 
such as those in the EU, data show that within countries the use of e-government 
services is associated with higher educa
-
tion, employment, urban residence, being 
male, and broadband access. Support to 
small-scale farmers, particularly women, 
through skills development and entry cost can help reduce inequality risks. 
• Data privacy: Digital technologies raise questions about the ownership and use 
of digital information acquired by these 9
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMEStechnologies. Providers of digital applica-
tions and data storage platforms for actors 
in the food system, including farmers, are 
private enterprises that could potentially use these data in different ways, including 
making the data available to third parties. 
In addition, significant amounts of data on farming practices are generated off-
farm through remote sensing via satellite 
imagery. Rules governing data ownership and use are often inadequate, which rais-
es concerns about data misuse. There are 
ongoing efforts to develop workable ar-rangements that will give farmers suffi-
cient confidence about data privacy and 
which are not overly restrictive for service providers.
25
While digital technologies offer an oppor -
tunity to improve food system outcomes, they are not a panacea. Complementary in
-
vestments are required to realize the potential benefits of digital technologies, especially in developing countries, and to address the 
multiple constraints faced by farmers. These 
investments include: (i) complementary in
-
frastructure such as roads, electricity, and post-harvest storage to improve access to 
markets and value addition; (ii) investment 
in skills and knowledge to improve farming practices in general, but also to improve dig
-
ital literacy and enable farmers to better take advantage of digital technologies; (iii) farmer 
organizations that more effectively link farm
-
ers to markets; and (iv) access to financial 
services to help finance agricultural inputs 
and for savings mobilization, for which digi -
tal technologies can also help. Countries can 
also make significant policy improvements 
to increase incentives for investment in food 
systems that in turn may increase demand for digital technologies. Digital technologies 
should be seen as a complement to, rather 
than a substitute for, better policies.
10
FUTURE OF FOOD
A range of digital technologies are current-
ly facilitating improved communications, 
operations, and transactions across the 
food system, that are resulting in better in-formed and engaged consumers with more 
transparent value chains, smarter farms, and 
improved public services. This section pro-vides some illustrative examples rather than 
an exhaustive list of digital technologies in 
the food system. 
Better informed and 
engaged consumers with more transparent value chains 
Consumers are increasingly demanding more 
transparency in the products they buy, in-
cluding product ingredients and information 
on sources and production methods. Digital technologies enable increased transparency What digital technologies are helping to improve food 
system outcomes?
by improving product traceability, and bet-
ter informing consumer choice as to price, 
nutrition, production practices, and envi-
ronmental and biodiversity impacts. With increased transparency, consumers are 
increasingly influencing how food gets pro-
duced. The range of digital technologies improving value chain transparency in-
cludes distributed ledger technologies, smart 
contracts, food-sensing technologies, and e-platforms.
Distributed ledger technologies (DL Ts) 
and smart contracts have significant 
potential to increase efficiency and trans-
parency in agricultural supply chains by improving product traceability and integ-
rity, contract certainty, proof/verification of 
geographic origin, and compliance with san-itary and phytosanitary requirements. DLTs 
and smart contracts also have potential to 
improve implementation and monitoring 11
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESof World Trade Organization agreements 
and key provisions relating to agricultural 
trade. DLTs can ensure that gains from trade 
accrue more directly to producers and con-sumers.
26 Traceability can reduce food loss 
in food systems, with estimated gains of up 
to 30 million tons annually if DLTs were to 
be incorporated in half of the world’s sup-ply chains.
27 For net environmental effects, 
emissions reductions from decreased food 
production associated with reduced food 
loss would need to be assessed against po-tential increases in emissions arising from 
DLT applications’ energy usage. The use of 
blockchain in the food system is still at an early stage, but there have been a number 
of successful pilot tests of its use. For exam-
ple, the French supermarket chain Carrefour uses blockchain to provide consumers with 
detailed information on chicken purchas-
es, including veterinary treatments and freshness.
28 To ensure their scalability and 
accessibility, however, DLTs solutions re-
quire appropriate ecosystems. While some of 
the elements of such ecosystems are technol-ogy-specific, they also largely entail enabling 
policy, regulatory and institutional condi-
tions as well as basic requirements relating to infrastructure, literacy, and digital and net-
work coverage.
29
Food-sensing technologies are increas-
ingly used to identify food quality, and 
monitor food safety. Food-sensing tech-
nologies are using cost-efficient and non-invasive approaches such as spectrosco-
py and image analysis to provide information 
on biometric and biochemical features of food (such as size, shape, moisture, protein 
and fat content, and level of contamination). 
For example, hyperspectral spectroscopy has identified with up to a 99.67 percent success rate contamination in red meat.
30 FruitQC, 
a Tellspec application, provides information 
on quality, ripeness, and flavor of fresh fruit 
in less than 15 seconds.31 By providing infor-
mation on food quality, food sensing could 
reduce food waste by 5 to 7 percent.32 With 
the cost of food-sensing technologies rapidly declining, they could be increasingly used to 
reduce expenses caused by food safety issues, which are particularly important in low- and 
middle-income economies where foodborne 
illnesses cost US$110 billion each year.
33 
Food-sensing technologies are becoming 
increasingly accessible through mobile de-
vices for both consumers and supply-chain stakeholders, and could potentially provide 
inspection of a much larger share of com-
mercially available food.
34 However, even 
for the most advanced food-sensing applica-
tions, the algorithms should be periodically 
validated and recalibrated by traditional lab-oratory methods to improve accuracy and 
precision.
Digitally-enabled marketplaces for ag-
ricultural products (e-platforms) can 
potentially shorten agricultural val-ue chains, provide access to new markets, 
reduce transaction costs, improve price 
transparency, and offer small and medium enterprises (SMEs) new business opportu-
nities. The power of e-platforms lies in the 
significantly reduced search cost of matching 
producers with consumers and lenders with 
borrowers, and their capacity to transfer and 
distribute risk. This process has the potential to sharply reduce past market failures and 
profoundly reshape value chains. In directly 
linking producers to consumers, e-platforms have the potential to shorten value chains 12
FUTURE OF FOODfor some products. Lower search costs 
help farmers bypass middlemen and im-
prove agricultural market performance.35,36,37 
According to the Department of Market System Development at China’s Ministry of 
Commerce, the total online sales volume of agricultural products in China reached over 
RMB 240 billion in 2017 (about US$36 bil-
lion), representing a 53 percent year-on-year increase. As of 2017, in China there were 
9.85 million online shops operated by rural 
farmers and employing over 280 million peo-ple. China’s e-commerce giant, Alibaba, has 
launched several initiatives to become a one-
stop-shop for SMEs conducting business online, including online marketplaces, back-
end e-commerce merchant services, and a 
cloud-computing e-commerce platform. Nevertheless, according to a recent survey in 
rural China, in 2016 only 1.5 percent of rural 
households sold agriculture products, mainly vegetables and fruit, through the Internet.
38 
Lack of knowledge and skills, and low trust 
in online transactions were the main reasons 
for low adoption. Storage and transportation of fresh produce present another challenge 
to growing remote e-commerce sales. If 
these aspects are addressed, there is potential for significant growth. 
Smarter farms 
Digital technologies can help improve farm profits by improving productivity and resil-
ience through more efficient use of land and 
water, improved access to capital, reduced product price dispersion across markets, 
and in some circumstances may lead to 
higher product prices and a higher share of retail prices for farmers. Relevant digital technologies include e-extension, precision 
agriculture (remote sensing), matching mar-
kets for mechanization services and other inputs, improved access to market price 
information and finance, and improved cer-
tification for export markets.
E-extension services can help raise farm profits and provide a cost-effective way to 
reach a greater number of farmers. They can 
provide farmers with relevant and real-time access to information on how to resolve both 
general and specific problems, ranging from 
sustainable farming practices, climate-smart solutions, and market access. Extension 
agents can use a combination of digital tech
-
nologies to reduce the cost and increase the 
frequency of interaction with farmers.39,40 For 
example, in Bangladesh, farmer-to-farmer 
videos on rice seed production produced for 
women led to lower production costs from lower seeding rates, and a 15 percent increase 
in rice yields.
41 Plantix, a mobile crop advi -
sory application for farmers, provides a quick 
diagnosis of plant diseases, pests, and nutrient 
deficiencies based on a photograph taken by 
a smartphone. Digital Green, which works in South Asia, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan 
Africa, has produced and disseminated over 
5,000 locally relevant videos in more than 50 languages, enabling farmers to share knowl
-
edge on agricultural production practices with one another
42 that provides a relatively 
cost-effective way of helping increase adop -
tion of improved production practices.43 
These videos are primarily screened off-line in 
communities that have limited electricity and 
Internet connectivity. While there are various forms of e-extension, many are fairly recent, 
and evaluation is still ongoing as to which 
forms of agricultural e-extension services 13
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESwork best, and under what conditions.44 In 
general, for successful results, e-extension 
services need to provide timely, localized, 
and customized information that addresses specific farming concerns in a comprehensi
-
ble format and appropriate language.45,46 At 
the same time, digital technologies are often 
a complement to field advisory visits, rather 
than a substitute. Used in combination with other more traditional forms of extension 
may make e-extension services even more 
useful to farmers.
Precision agriculture can improve the quantity and quality of agricultural out-
put while reducing input usage (such as 
water, energy, fertilizers, and pesticides), thereby generating climate benefits, while 
also increasing time efficiency by perform-
ing farming practices remotely. Reducing the use of inputs such as fertilizers and pes-
ticides offers positive environmental effects. 
Precision farming uses data received from global positioning systems, satellite and aeri-
al imagery, and sensors (for example, sensors 
for soil conditions, ground water levels, and precipitation detectors) to enable a range 
of precision agriculture applications. In the 
United States, precision agriculture tech-nologies were used on 30 to 50 percent of 
corn and soybean acreage in 2010–2012. 
Impacts on farm profits were positive but small, with adoption more likely on larger 
farms.
47 As precision agriculture technolo-
gies become easier to implement they could help improve incomes on smaller farms. The 
Nano Ganesh system in Pune, India, uses digital applications for irrigation systems to 
allow control of irrigation pumps remotely, 
by mobile phone, which saves farmers water, energy, and time.
48 In addition to potential productivity gains and cost savings, preci-sion farming via satellite technology enables governments to study how agricultural prac-
tices affect the ecosystem, develop better 
regulations,
49 and enforce sustainable land 
management practices, as in Uruguay.50 Even 
though many high-tech precision tools are 
more accessible for large-scale farms that can 
afford significant investments in technology, the situation is changing as access to tech-
nologies and their delivery become cheaper 
and more affordable for smallholders. For ex-ample, the International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center (CIMMYT) has been 
testing variable rate fertilizer application kits for smallholder farmers.
51
Matching markets can improve small-holder farmers’ access to mechanization 
services and, in turn, reduce unit costs and 
increase competitiveness. Physical capital, such as farm machinery, is a key driver of on-
farm productivity. However, the high upfront 
cost of farm machinery often puts it out of reach of smallholder farmers. Digital plat-
forms can create new markets for machinery 
rentals by: (i) providing more affordable access to physical capital for smallhold-
er farmers, and (ii) putting underused assets 
to work by matching suppliers of machin-ery rental services with farmers wanting 
these services, just as Uber matches driv-
ers with customers for taxi services. As the marginal cost of matching buyers and sellers 
through digital platforms is extremely low, 
this service has the potential to reduce unit costs of machinery rental services through 
saved transaction and search costs. A study 
in Zambia showed that hiring tractor ser-vices leads to higher farm profit, by enabling 
farmers to expand their cultivated area and, 14
FUTURE OF FOODconsequently, increase their income.52 Well-
known examples include: TroTro Tractor, 
Ghana’s platform to connect tractor opera-
tors with farmers; Trringo, India’s foremost tractor and farm equipment rental service; 
and Hello Tractor, which matches tractor 
owners with smallholder farmers in need of tractor services via simple text messages in 
Ghana, Kenya, and Nigeria.
Under certain conditions, improved access 
to market information via mobile phone 
can help increase farmers’ sales and prices, and reduce price dispersions across mar-
kets. Increased access to information about 
market prices via mobile phone can increase farmers’ bargaining power vis-a-vis traders 
on farm gate product sales. This process, in 
turn, can help increase farmers’ shares of re-tail prices and farmer sales.
53,54 For example, 
analysis shows that access via mobile phone 
short message service (SMS) to market price 
information on local crops in the central highlands of Peru increased farmers’ sales 
prices by 13 to14 percent relative to coun-
terparts without access to this information.
55 
For sales to markets, market information 
via mobile phones can better inform farm-
ers and traders where prices are highest. The latter market arbitrage can help reduce 
price dispersions across markets,
56,57 and re-
duce relative oversupply to specific markets thereby potentially lowering food loss and 
waste. Not all studies show that these effects are significant. Impacts on farmer pric-
es from increased market information via 
mobile phones tend to be dependent on lo-cal conditions, for example: (i) impacts tend 
to be more significant, particularly for me-
dium-to-high value commodities, where mobile phone penetration is lower; and (ii) the specific content of the information has greater impact as mobile phone penetra-
tion and access to information increases.
58 
In these situations, content customized to higher value commodities and varieties pro-
duced by farmers in specific locations had higher impact.
59
The digitization of transactions and pay-ments, and data analytics, can improve 
access to finance by smallholder farmers. 
Agricultural finance can facilitate farmer ac-cess to improved inputs and technologies. 
Yet, less than 10 percent of smallhold-
er farmers worldwide have access to formal credit.
60 Digital technologies improve access 
to finance through a combination of lower-
ing operating costs and offering better ways 
to assess weather, market, and credit risk. Financial institutions and agribusinesses can 
use digital transaction records to process and 
facilitate credit. Mobile phone-based dig-ital financial services have the potential to 
reach formerly unbanked populations as mo-
bile phone and Internet usage expands. In addition, numerous studies show that dig-
ital financial solutions have a positive and 
significant effect on annual household in-put use, agricultural commercialization, 
and household income.
61,62 New FinTech 
solutions are developing rapidly. M-PESA represents a prominent example—the 
Kenya mobile phone-based payment system was introduced in 2007 and, by 2009, had 
reached 65 percent of Kenyan households. 
Furthermore, it is estimated, that M-PESA has lifted 2 percent of rural Kenyan house-
holds out of poverty.
63 While FinTech firms 
still play a negligible role in global com-mercial lending, digital technologies in the 
global financial sector will gain growing 15
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESimportance over the coming years, including 
in the food system.64 For example, big data65 
and advanced analytics can significantly 
reduce the cost of establishing creditwor-
thiness of farmers and assessing insurance risk. These lower costs can potentially low-
er interest rates and insurance premiums for 
farmers thereby increasing access to these fi-nancial services. Farmdrive in Kenya, and 
Harvesting in Uganda, are examples of com-
panies using data analytics to assess farmers’ creditworthiness for financing.
Improved public services 
Digital technologies can help improve public services in the food system. Beyond e-exten-
sion services detailed in the previous section, 
such services include better targeted gov-ernment-to-person payments, improved 
risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation.
Digital technologies can be used to 
better target government-to-person pay-ments, improving distribution efficiency 
and transparency. Through the introduc-
tion of a digital system in Estonia, the time spent applying for agricultural subsidies at 
the Agricultural Registers and Information 
Board decreased from 300 minutes to 45 minutes.
66 In Nigeria, the government 
reached a higher number of recipients with 
lower cost and lower leakage through an 
e-wallet program for subsidized fertilizers. Prior to this program, in 2011, the govern-
ment spent approximately US$180 million 
for 600,000–800,000 smallholders, most of which never reached the intended benefi-
ciaries.
67 In 2013, with the e-wallet digital payment system, the government reached 
4.3 million smallholders at a cost of approx-
imately US$96 million.68 This system also 
facilitated financial inclusion of farmers and expanded private sector opportunities.
69 A 
recent review of pilot e-voucher programs for subsidized farm inputs in Guinea, Mali, 
and Niger highlighted several lessons for implementation of these types of programs. 
These lessons include the following: the im-
portance of mobile network coverage; actual possession of mobile phones by intended 
beneficiaries, particularly women; promot-
ing literacy and knowledge about how the program works; and organization of procure-
ment and agro-dealers to ensure availability 
of farm inputs at the right time of the agri-cultural season.
70
Remote sensing and big data applications are being increasingly used for enhanced 
management and efficiency, and also to 
mitigate risk. These applications include au-tomated early warning systems for crop or 
livestock health, related to weather, pests 
and diseases that can facilitate proactive and timely management responses. Advances 
in data management and machine learn-
ing
71 now make it possible to integrate and 
analyze billions of data points (analog and 
digital, ground-based and remotely sensed) 
at high-spatial and temporal resolution. For example, the World Bank Agriculture 
Observatory is accessing ground-based hy-
drometeorological data (very sparse in most developing countries) and high-den-
sity weather satellite radar platforms, and 
applying machine learning to generate a continuous weather surface across the earth’s 
croplands. The resulting weather data com-
prise 7 billion data points generated daily by 16
FUTURE OF FOOD1.5 million virtual weather stations across 
the world and updated four times a day, to 
generate “real-time” weather data at intervals 
of nine kilometers across global agricultural land. This data surface represents a disrup-
tive approach to the traditional method of 
relying solely on ground-based hydromete-orological stations that need to be procured, 
installed, calibrated, and maintained, even 
before the data are accessed, analyzed, and synthesized. By coupling the high resolution 
weather surface with cropping calendars, it 
is possible to make real-time assessments of crop performance and to take proactive 
management risk-mitigation interventions 
and decision support across the entire value chain, comprising farmers, input suppliers, 
logistics providers, markets, and policy mak-
ers. Because early projections of crop yield anomalies are possible at the sub-national, 
national, regional, and even global level, the 
Agriculture Observatory platform can pro-vide early warning of potential food shocks 
several months in advance of normal har-
vest periods. Information and analysis from the Agriculture Observatory are being used 
to guide the design and implementation of 
agriculture projects. National Agriculture Observatories are in operation or are being 
set up in Ethiopia, Kenya, Russia, Zambia, 
and Zimbabwe, in close collaboration with national agricultural and meteorological 
agencies.
Digital technologies offer a broad spec-
trum of tools and data to enhance 
monitoring and evaluation of outcomes in agriculture. The uptake of digital tools and 
consequent data generation in agriculture 
can help enable more cost-effective monitor-ing and evaluation (M&E) of results. While digital survey tools have long been used to lower the cost of project-level data collec-
tion, more advanced technologies such as 
remote sensing can bring additional efficien-cies to M&E. For example, satellite earth 
observation provides unbiased, consistent, 
and timely information on whether invest-ments in agricultural development are taking 
place in a sustainable and effective manner. 
Satellite data can thereby promote better transparency, responsibility, and account-
ability to impact assessments of agricultural 
investments on crop production and water management. The World Bank support-
ed the Resilient Agriculture and Integrated 
Water Resources Management Project in the Dominican Republic, which used drones 
to monitor changes in the physical condition 
of irrigation infrastructure in 1,200 hect-ares (ha) of rice fields. The pilot study was 
designed to understand the value, includ-
ing cost-effectiveness and feasibility, of using drones for M&E in infrastructure develop-
ment interventions relative to other methods 
such as satellite imagery, aerial photography, and physical inspection. Drones provid-
ed higher resolution, easy deployment, and 
eliminated problems relating to cloud cov-er interference that occur with satellite 
imagery and aerial photography. However, 
as drones cover relatively smaller areas as they can only make a finite number of flights 
per day, and have a higher regulatory bur-
den, they are more cost-effective for smaller areas. Another tool for monitoring and eval-
uation is the Geo-Enabling Initiative for 
Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS). GEMS is a smart-phone-based system that 
enables monitoring agents to enter data on 
implementation progress, including photos, and is automatically time stamped with GPS 17
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMEScoordinates. The information can be entered 
off-line and, when a mobile connection is 
available, is uploaded to a central database. 
GEMS is being increasingly used to mon-itor implementation progress of projects 
in fragile situations, such as in Democratic 
Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic. 
The set of digital technologies across val-
ue chains, farms, and public services 
highlighted in this section require differ-
ent levels of mobile phone and Internet connectivity. For example, agricultur-
al extension and farmer-to-farmer learning 
provided by digital videos can be provided off-line with no need for mobile or Internet connectivity. Mobile-phone-based market price information, e-platforms for mecha-
nized services (such as Hello Tractor), and 
government-to-person payments require ac-cess to mobile networks but low Internet 
connectivity, while e-statistics require 
Internet connectivity but low mobile cov-erage. Additionally, some technologies are 
best suited to environments with both high 
mobile coverage and high Internet connec-tivity such as distributed ledger technologies 
for value chain traceability. The continuum 
of digital technologies offers opportunities across a range of mobile phone and Internet 
connectivity (figure 1). Skills needs also vary 
across this continuum, an aspect that is ad-dressed in the next section of the paper.FIGURE 1:  Continuum of digital technology opportunities (illustrative) 
Low mobile
coverageHigh  mobile
coverage
E-agriculture statisticsPrecision agricultureDistributed ledger technologies for
value chain traceability
Food-sensing technologies to
monitor food quality and safety E-platformsfor agriculture
products E-Platform for mechanizedservices
Market price informationMobile payments, including
government-to-person payments
E-extension using
video tools
High Internet connectivity Low Internet connectivity18
FUTURE OF FOOD
The adoption of digital technologies in ag-
gregate is affected by both supply factors 
(network coverage and digital content), and 
demand factors (including skills/knowl-edge). These factors have strong positive 
correlations with country level digital adop-
tion (box 1). While data on these correlates are not available for separate geographies or 
sectors, and represent aggregate countrywide 
data, a similar general pattern is likely for the food system. However, adoption rates in 
agriculture have been lower than other sec-
tors according to the McKinsey Industry Digitization Index. This situation is likely 
reflective of the lower mobile coverage and 
Internet connectivity in rural areas where farmers and many agribusinesses operate, 
and the lower levels of skills in rural areas. 
The development of digital applications or content, indicative of digital entrepreneur-
ship, is correlated to network coverage (0.84 
correlation coefficient between network What public actions can facilitate broader adoption of 
digital technologies and harness their impacts on food system outcomes?
coverage and number of mobile applications 
developed per person). As network coverage 
increases, so do potential users of digital ap-
plications, which increases the incentives of entrepreneurs to develop digital applications 
or content. Knowledge/skills impact digi-
tal adoption in two primary ways. First, the knowledge/skills of end users, such as farm-
ers, affect demand for digital technologies. 
For example, farmers have to know that a certain technology exists, believe it will help 
them (demonstration of effectiveness), and 
learn how to use it. Second, the knowledge/skills of entrepreneurs that develop digital 
technologies impacts digital adoption (the 
correlation coefficient of basic skills and mo-bile applications developed per person was 
0.89 using 2017 cross-country data). Digital 
technologies can be designed in a way that requires low-level skills and literacy for its 
use, for example with voice and touch screen 
functionality. 19
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESEven with no or low mobile phone cover-
age and Internet connectivity, there are 
still opportunities for digital technologies. 
Digital technologies are advancing rapid-ly and there are now off-line technologies 
that can help poor and even illiterate farm-
ers improve production practices with no or limited mobile phone coverage and Internet 
connectivity. 
The Maximizing Finance for Development 
(MFD) framework can help identi -
fy public actions needed to facilitate broader adoption of digital technologies and harness their impact on food sys
-
tem outcomes. MFD looks for ways to 
crowd-in private resources to help achieve 
development goals, while optimizing the 
use of scarce public resources. As digital technologies are primarily generated by the 
private sector, and as the farmers and agri
-
businesses adopting these technologies are 
also private actors, MFD can help identify 
entry points for public sector action to facili -
tate broader adoption of digital technologies 
and harness their impacts on food system BOX 1:  Digital adoption correlates
Sources: World Bank and GSMA 2017 country level data.1.0
100 0 20 40Correlation coeﬃcient = 0.85
Network coverage
(normalized score 0–100)Number of mobile apps developed per
person (normalized score 0–100)Correlation coeﬃcient = 0.90
60 80 100 0 20 40 60 800.8
0.60.4Digital Adoption Index0.20.01.00.80.60.4Digital Adoption Index0.20.0Network coverage
1.0
100 0 20 40Correlation coeﬃcient = 0.87
Basic skills (normalized score 0–100)60 800.80.60.4Digital Adoption Index0.20.0Basic skillDigital content20
FUTURE OF FOODoutcomes.72 A sequence of questions about 
rural network coverage, digital applications 
and content, and private end-user adop -
tion can help identify appropriate public 
actions. These questions include: (i) Is the 
private sector investing in digital technolo -
gies? (ii) If not, is it because there is limited 
space for private sector activity as a result 
of restrictions to competition, public sector 
dominance, or private sector monopolies? (iii) If not, is it because of policy and reg
-
ulatory weaknesses or gaps? (iv) If not, can public investment help crowd-in private in
-
vestment? (table 1). While these questions proceed in sequence, the intention is not 
to stop if the answer to a question is affir
-
mative, but to answer all the questions and 
ensure a complete assessment and identifi -
cation of public policy entry points. Once these have been identified, implementation 
of public policy and regulatory changes, and 
public investments need not be sequential. Indeed, they are likely to be simultaneous 
or multi-staged. Cutting across these as
-
pects are considerations for public policies 
to address efficiency, equity, and environ -
mental sustainability aspects, as well as addressing the risks of digital technologies 
highlighted in the earlier section, such as 
data privacy, inequality, and concentration of market power. Table 1 provides a brief 
assessment of the first question, and if the 
answer to one of the other questions is yes, it provides potential entry points for pub
-
lic sector actions. Factors included in table 1 are expanded on in the subsequent text. 
The intent is not to provide an exhaustive 
treatment of each factor, but rather provide a range of potential entry points for action, 
and in the process, refer to ongoing and rel
-
evant World Bank work.Expand rural network 
coverage
Rural network coverage is often relatively 
low but varies significantly across countries 
with similar income levels: While there are 
off-line digital technologies, as discussed in the previous section, network coverage in-
creases the opportunity set of digital mobile 
technologies for people residing in rural ar-eas. In addition, the type of network available 
influences the type of digital application that 
can be used. For example, second genera-tion (2G) networks are more suited for voice 
and text messaging, while third generation 
(3G) and fourth generation (4G) networks allow for broader applications and use of 
smart phones. While, on average, more than 
90 percent of the population in high income countries have network coverage, only about 
50 percent of the population in low-in-
come countries do, on average. For example, about three-quarters of the population in 
Chad have no network coverage, whereas in 
Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of Congo, about 60 percent have no cov-
erage.
73 While more than 60 percent of 
Burkina Faso’s population have 2G coverage, only 25 percent have 3G coverage or faster.
74 
The extent of network coverage across coun-tries, among other factors, is likely affected by 
GDP per capita levels, country size, popula-tion distribution, and policies.
75 All else held 
equal, countries that are richer, smaller, and 
with more concentrated populations tend to 
have mobile network coverage rolled out to a larger share of the population.
76 By contrast, 
countries with more dispersed populations, 
as reflected in a relatively higher share of the 
population living in rural areas, tend to have 21
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESlower network coverage (figure 2). While 
coverage in rural areas tends to be lower than 
in urban areas, some low-income countries have managed to achieve relatively high lev-
els of rural coverage. For example, more than 
90 percent of Rwanda’s population have 3G TABLE 1:  Potential entry points for public-sector actions to facilitate broader adoption of digital 
technologies and harness their impacts on food system outcomes
MFD cascade 
of questions:Supply-side factors Demand-side factors
Expand rural network 
coverage  
(expand digital 
infrastructure)Develop relevant digital 
applications  
(foster digital 
entrepreneurship)Facilitate demand for 
digital technologies in the 
food system (particularly 
smallholder farmers)
Is the private sector doing it?  ¾>90% coverage in high income countries
 ¾50% coverage in low-income countries (even lower for 3G or faster networks) ¾Increase in ag-tech investment over last 10 years; growth in ag-tech start-ups in Africa over the past two years
 ¾Significant variation across countries ¾Higher farmer adoption of digital technologies in high-income countries relative to low-income countries; and higher adoption rates on larger farms 
If not, then is it because of limited space for private sector activity?
 ¾Foster competition among telecoms (competition is associated with more extensive rural coverage) ¾Lower entry costs to facilitate competition among digital platforms
If not, then is it because of policy and regulatory gaps and weaknesses?To help lower the cost of providing rural coverage:
 ¾Adopt a spectrum policy that boosts connectivity
 ¾Lower infrastructure taxes/duties
 ¾Allow infrastructure sharing
 ¾Ensure consistency/streamline local level regulations
 ¾Reduce policy/regulatory uncertainty ¾Improve the enabling environment for business development
 ¾Design digital regulations around functionality
 ¾Clarify data ownership
 ¾Develop governance arrangements for open 
data
 ¾Invest in open data 
that have public good characteristics ¾Improve farmers’ incentives to invest
 ¾Develop data governance arrangements that build users’ confidence and trust in digital technologies
If not, then can public investment help crowd-in private investment?
 ¾Invest in complementary infrastructure
 ¾As a last resort, subsidize service providers to offset higher costs of rolling out rural coverage  ¾Support skills development 
 ¾Improve access to finance for start-up and early maturity ag-tech enterprises
 ¾Support increased use of digital payments ¾Support skills development for vulnerable groups
 ¾Develop relevant, customized tools
 ¾Reduce costs of technology adoption
 ¾Improve access to finance
 ¾Invest in complementary infrastructure
 ¾Support development of digital farmer identification22
FUTURE OF FOODcoverage and 85 percent of the population in 
Kenya have 3G coverage. The rural popula-
tion comprises 83 percent and 73 percent of 
the total population in Rwanda and Kenya respectively, suggesting high rural coverage.
77 
Carefully designed policies and regulations 
can promote greater expansion of networks 
to rural areas.
Expand the space for private sector activi-
ty: Evidence from more than 200 countries 
over 15 years shows that network competi-
tion has helped expand network coverage.78 
Taking into account other factors such as GDP per capita; and population size, den-
sity, and distribution, analysis shows that population coverage was, on average, 12 
percentage points higher in countries with 
network competition compared to coun-tries served by a single network provider; 
population coverage for 3G was, on average, 
36 percentage points higher, and popula-tion coverage increased three times as fast 
in countries with network competition.
79 
While increased competition in the telecoms sector is associated with increased rural cov-
erage in low-income countries, competition policy alone is unlikely to ensure parity in urban and rural costs and coverage.
80 
Policy and regulatory entry points to low -
er costs: At lower population densities, unit 
costs of telecom service providers per user 
are higher. In addition, rural areas often 
have higher installation and maintenance costs, greater distances from main roads, 
more uneven terrain,
81 and lack of electric -
ity. This situation results in higher prices 
in rural areas, or a lack of services if de -
mand is insufficient to cover costs. Potential public policy entry points to expand rural 
coverage in developing countries include: 
(i) ensuring sufficient release of spectrum (frequencies allocated for communications 
over the airwaves) and designing associat
-
ed spectrum policy with the aim of boosting 
rural connectivity;82 (ii) lowering infrastruc -
ture taxes and/or import duties to lower costs; (iii) making consideration for infra
-
structure sharing, including mast or tower sharing, as a way to lower costs, and allow
-
ing customers to roam between networks; and (iv) ensuring consistency and stream
-
lining of regulations at the local level on site deployments.
83
Reduce policy uncertainty: Reducing macroeconomic and political stability, and en-
suring more reliable policies reduces private 
sector investment risks. In addition, regula-tory systems that provide greater certainty 
for investment serve as a necessary condition 
for the expansion of digital infrastructure in rural areas. According to the World Bank’s 
Enabling the Business of Agriculture report,
84 
countries with higher quality ICT regu-lations
85 tend to also perform well on the 
GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index. In FIGURE 2:  Network Coverage
100
100 0 20 40
Percent of population in rural areas60 80405060708090
30
20Digital Adoption Index
10
0
Sources: World Bank and GSMA country-level data.23
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESaddition to high transaction costs, arbitrary 
regulatory changes contribute to high prices 
for end-users in rural areas.86 
Use public investment to help crowd-in 
private investment: Complementary invest-
ments such as rural electrification, including 
local solar energy sources, can address power 
supply constraints in rural areas. Countries such as the United States have also provided 
subsidies to services providers to offset the 
higher cost to extend broadband coverage to rural areas.
87,88
Foster digital 
entrepreneurship
Digital entrepreneurship varies signifi -
cantly across countries, with recent growth 
in ag-tech startups. There is a positive cor -
relation between the number of digital applications developed per person and net
-
work coverage,89 and this correlation is likely 
indicative of the importance of an expanding 
potential client base for developers. However, 
there is a fairly large variation across coun -
tries in the number of digital applications developed per person, per level of network 
coverage. Part of this difference may be due 
to differing enabling environments for digi
-
tal entrepreneurship in these countries. There has been significant growth in ag-tech invest
-
ments in the past 10 years,90 and in the past 
two years, significant growth in ag-tech start -
ups in Africa.91 This section highlights some 
public sector entry points to foster digital en -
trepreneurship and investment in the food system, and to address some of the risks. The 
World Bank has ongoing work on this topic 
focusing on the Africa region.Development of digital applications is in
-
fluenced by a broad set of country condi -
tions. These conditions include supply-side factors, such as: digital infrastructure, includ
-
ing network coverage; other infrastructure such as roads and electricity; the enabling 
environment for entrepreneurship; skills de
-
velopment; and access to financing. Also im -
portant are demand-side factors, including 
support for smallholder farmers and agri -
businesses to adopt digital technologies. A vibrant innovation ecosystem also requires 
collaboration among companies, inves
-
tors, governments, and development part -
ners. Understanding the binding constraints 
among these sets of conditions can help in -
form what the public sector can do to improve the innovation ecosystem for ag-tech entre
-
preneurs. While some of these aspects are relevant for all entrepreneurship in the food 
system, others are specific to digital develop
-
ment. For example, there are ongoing ques -
tions about the risks associated with market 
concentration in digital platforms, data pri -
vacy, and consumer protection. Digital regis -
tries are also one solution for better targeting services, and better informing development of 
digital applications. Per the MFD framework 
in table 1, this section discusses the space for private sector activity, including policies and 
regulations, as well as public investments to 
crowd-in private investment in digital appli
-
cation and content with a particular focus on addressing such risks as market concentration 
and data governance. 
Lower entry costs for private sector com -
petition in digital platforms. There is a risk 
that digital technologies can increase the 
concentration of market power. Prominent 
examples include Facebook among social 24
FUTURE OF FOODnetwork providers, Amazon among e-com -
merce marketplaces, and Google among 
search engines. There has been much debate 
on this topic which is beyond the scope of 
this paper to try to resolve. Nevertheless, a key goal is to keep market entry costs low 
for new entrants and switching costs low 
for consumers.
92 Low entry costs allow for 
dynamic development and competition, 
so that new players with superior business 
models and innovation can enter a specif -
ic market and disrupt the existing market leader. However, developers of new digi
-
tal solutions often face high up-front costs associated with software, data storage, ana
-
lytics, and security, which deter competition. In addition, network effects and switching 
costs can create barriers to scale for new en
-
trants; the more users connected via one 
network (such as for buyer-producer plat -
forms within a value chain), the smaller the incentive for those users to switch to anoth
-
er network. These aspects make regulation a significant challenge. In some cases, regula
-
tions have been expanded to curb excessive market concentration, as was the case for 
M-Pesa, a highly successful money trans
-
fer system rolled out in Kenya by Safaricom, 
a mobile services provider. Initially, banking 
regulators’ hands-off approach contribut -
ed to the rapid growth of M-Pesa. Through 
exclusivity arrangements, M-Pesa agents 
could only offer products and services with -
in the M-Pesa network, which locked agents 
and most users into a single network. Given 
Safaricom’s dominant market share, the ex -
clusivity contracts posed an entry barrier 
for other telecom operators, and the Kenya 
Competition Authority expunged the ex -
clusivity agreements in 2014, permitting 
M-Pesa agents to work with other mobile operators. The cost of money transfers sub -
sequently declined.93 
Improve the enabling environment for business development. Macroeconomic sta
-
bility and peace are key conditions for private enterprise development. In addition, an en
-
vironment characterized by unclear property rights, frequent policy change and reversal, 
uncertain contract enforcement, and high cor
-
ruption translates into lower investment and 
growth.94 Supportive policies such as making 
it easy to start a business, business-friendly 
tax policy, and strong patent protection can 
also help facilitate entrepreneurship. 
Design digital regulations around func-tionality and contestability. The growing 
complexity of digital ecosystems underpin-ning digitization of food systems, as well as an exponential increase in the volume 
and speed with which data are collect-
ed and analyzed add to the challenges of designing appropriate policy and regulato-
ry systems. Growing innovation and rapid 
market changes make regulations both more complex and more prone to quickly be-
come obsolete. On the other hand, existing 
policy and regulatory frameworks are of-ten unsuited to addressing concerns, such 
as data privacy and ownership issues, arising 
from rapid digitization. All this results in a higher likelihood of regulatory uncertainty, 
higher compliance costs, and lower levels of 
technology adoption. According to a recent PwC survey,
95 regulatory uncertainty around 
blockchain-based solutions was identified 
as a major scale-up challenge across various 
sectors. For the new regulatory frameworks to address these challenges, regulations and 
regulatory institutions should be re-designed 25
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESaround the principles of contestability—that 
is, to address risks associated with market 
concentration—and functionality focus-
ing on the ultimate policy objectives (for example, cost effectiveness or privacy pro-
tection), rather than on the technologies. 
Regulations should be dynamic and focus on principles that allow ex-post enforcement 
of broad rules rather than detailed ex-ante 
prescriptions. Lastly, new regulatory frame-works should recognize that many current 
regulations may be outdated, and the new 
digital economy may require a clean slate ap-proach to re-evaluate existing and/or new 
regulations.
96
Clarify data ownership. The economic value 
of data in food systems increases as they are 
aggregated, creating important policy and 
regulatory issues related to individual versus aggregate data ownership and use rights that 
are important for both developers of digital 
applications and farmers. Furthermore, de-fining data ownership and data use rights 
becomes increasingly complicated as the 
number of data users increases. In the event that data are generated using equipment 
owned by a farmer, defining data ownership 
rights is a straightforward task. However, this is not the case in a situation in which 
these data are aggregated and transmitted to 
cloud storage that can subsequently transfer them to a third party. Across the developed 
world, legal and regulatory frameworks 
around agricultural data ownership remain piecemeal and ad hoc. For example, in the 
United States and Canada, existing law does 
not recognize agricultural data as physical or intellectual property. As such, data own-
ership is not clearly defined. Nevertheless, 
countries have been experimenting with different approaches to address data own-ership issues. For example, U.S. and New Zealand agricultural sectors have been using 
voluntary industry standards to establish an 
understanding between farmers and service providers that use farm data on data owner-
ship.
97 In 2018, an EU coalition of agri-food 
associations introduced a joint EU Code of Conduct on agricultural data sharing.
98
Develop governance arrangements for 
open data. Policy and regulatory frameworks 
guiding aspects of data privacy and owner-
ship also serve as major factors in enabling access and use of open data in agriculture, 
this includes government-to-private and 
private-to-private data sharing. Advantages of open data are numerous—they can ad-
vance innovation, serve as a platform for 
entrepreneurship, and increase transparen-cy and accountability in the food system. 
To reap such benefits, however, certain chal-
lenges must be addressed,
99 including both 
technical and legal. To facilitate the use of 
open data, standards need to be designed to 
ensure privacy of individual data through ef-fective anonymization while also ensuring its 
interoperability. Also, a certain level of infra-
structure needs to be in place to enable the scaling up of open data initiatives. Properly 
designed data governance frameworks serve 
an integral role in enabling open data avail-ability and use. While there is no single 
governance solution for open data in agricul-
ture, Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition identifies four possible governance 
strategies, namely: i) inter-institutional co-
operation to build consensus about data ownership; ii) model frameworks adopted at 
the local, national, and regional levels; iii) so-
cial certification schemes that leverage the 26
FUTURE OF FOODpower of ethical consumption, and iv) reach-
ing an international agreement on ownership 
of open data. 
Invest in open data that have public good 
characteristics. Invest in agricultural statis-
tics and agroclimatic data that can be used by all, including creative entrepreneurs. Making 
these data available would reduce the cost of 
development and scaling up of novel dig-ital applications, as developers would not 
have to devote resources to data collection. 
Public investment in agricultural statistics and agroclimatic data is likely an under-ap-
preciated driver of the development of 
new digital applications to better meet the needs of smallholders. It is an open question 
whether there is a need for direct subsidies 
to entrepreneurs to develop applications for low-income farms and agri-SMEs, as such 
activities will become more profitable once 
low-income owners of farms and firms are digitally connected, and entrepreneurs are 
able to develop more relevant applications 
with increased availability of information.
100
Support skills development. The number of digital applications developed per person is 
highly correlated with basic skills (in 2017, 
the cross-country correlation coefficient was 0.89).
101 Skills development can fos-
ter digital entrepreneurship. Incorporating 
more entrepreneurial and digital technol-
ogy content in the curricula of agricultural universities and training institutes, togeth-
er with associated teaching staff, could help 
develop skill sets needed to foster digital de-velopment in the food system. Mentoring 
and ongoing business advisory programs for 
enterprise development tend to be more ef-fective than a one-off training. For example, Twiga Foods in Kenya, a five-year-old com-pany that uses a technology platform to 
improve the supply chain from farmers to 
markets, has effectively benefited from men-torship programs (Google Launchpad and 
GSMA Ecosystem). The Africa Agriculture 
Incubators Network (AAIN) is a network of companies that supports agriculture start-
ups via technical support and mentorship, 
including help in preparing business propos-als to pitch to investors. Entrepreneurship 
programs that combine interventions (men-
toring or coaching, finance, and access to markets), addressing the multiple constraints 
that entrepreneurs face, tend to be more ef-
fective than single-intervention programs.
102 
While a recent global analysis of youth-tar-
geted interventions found that only about 
one-third showed a significant positive im-pact on employment or earnings, in low- and 
middle-income countries such programs 
have been more successful, and skills training and entrepreneurship programs seem to have 
had a higher impact.
103 Involving the private 
sector in program delivery is associated with improved impacts. 
Improve access to finance for start-up 
and early maturity AgTech enterprises. 
Access to finance is an important ingredient in successful start-up and scaling of digital 
technology enterprises. Early maturity enter-
prises need to rely mainly on financing from family or friends, venture capital, or com-
mercial finance blended with concessional 
funding provided by a development partner. Venture capital investments in digital agri-
culture have increased in the past five years, 
with significant investments in precision ag-riculture, agriculture marketplaces, FinTech, 
AgTech imagery, and indoor agriculture.
104 27
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESWhile much of the focus is on developed 
countries, particularly the United States, 
venture investment in developing coun-
tries has been increasing. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World 
Bank has an important role to play in this 
space. IFC has a significant venture port-folio that it invests on commercial terms in 
emerging markets, including food systems. 
Examples include Chaldal in Bangladesh, an online grocery delivery service, and Big 
Basket in India, which has added groceries 
to its portfolio of products and is sourcing from farmers.  IFC also invests indirect-
ly through funds into companies, such as 
Agrofy in Argentina, which provides an on-line agriculture marketplace, and Agrostar 
in India, which is an online marketplace for 
agricultural inputs. Leveraging blended fi-nance, IFC has also directly invested in early 
stage AgTech companies such as Kenya’s 
Twiga Foods. Blended finance could po-tentially help provide financial support to 
high-development impact investments that 
would otherwise not easily attract financing on strictly commercial terms because risks 
are high and the returns are either unproven 
or not commensurate with the level of risk. 
Support increased use of digital payments, 
particularly for the poor and vulnerable groups. Digital payments can be an im-
portant element of entrepreneur success. 
For example, digital payments through e-commerce platforms can help broaden an 
entrepreneur’s client base and enable farm-
ers to more easily sell or purchase products on these platforms. Expanding network 
coverage can help increase scope for digital 
payments. Poor network quality and cover-age can lead to transaction failures that can erode confidence and trust among users. Opening a bank or mobile money account 
usually requires some form of official govern-
ment identification, such as an identification card, which many people in rural areas lack. 
Digital identification can help bridge this 
gap. Digital payment systems are only suc-cessful if there is sufficient interest and trust 
from both entrepreneur and customers to use 
this form of payment. An appropriate con-sumer protection framework, robust digital 
networks, and banking and telecoms policies 
that support digital financial services are all important components of a functioning dig-
ital payment system.
105 In addition, targeted 
efforts are needed to support inclusion of the poor and elderly in these payments systems 
to prevent widening inequality.
106 When 
digital applications require digital payments, 
the unenrolled get locked out. 
Support development of digital identifi-
cation for farmers. Digital identification 
provides a critical platform for digital ag-riculture service providers to scale their 
businesses because startups and digital ag-
ricultural solution providers spend about 50 percent of their initial business develop-
ment efforts profiling and identifying target 
farmers. In addition, digital identification, especially when linked to land and livestock 
assets, is a powerful bridge for farmers to ac-
cess financial services, to reduce fraud and improve efficiency in the delivery of goods 
and services, and for governments to bet-
ter target agricultural support. For example, Estonia put 99 percent of its public services 
online and enabled online identity verifica-
tion and authentication via a platform that connects various registries to the country’s 
foundational digital ID system. As a result, 28
FUTURE OF FOODEstonia’s farmers spend 45 minutes, on av-
erage, on support applications, down from 
300 minutes using the previous paper-based 
system. They also receive their payments more rapidly as transfers are directly linked 
to their bank accounts. Furthermore, farm-
ers can register land and cattle online and access detailed geographic and soil-related 
information through the platform. Another 
example is Uruguay, which has become a leading exporter of meat since implementing 
a livestock traceability system. The system 
setup was initially motivated by an out-break of foot-and-mouth disease in 2000 
and 2001, which led to the overhaul of a 
paper-based system that had been in place for 30 years. Each head of cattle is associat-
ed with an individual farmer, based on his or 
her national ID. 
Facilitate demand for 
digital technologies in the food system 
In the absence of demand for digital tech-
nologies, actions to facilitate supply are 
unlikely to increase adoption. Digital tech-
nologies are not an end in themselves, but a means to help improve food system out-
comes. If food consumers are not demanding 
more transparency, food distributors will have little incentive to adopt digital technol-
ogies to ensure traceability. If farmers retain 
their production for subsistence consump-tion, they will likely have little use for mobile 
phone-based systems that facilitate price 
discovery. If governments do not promote policies that involve payments to farmers, 
they will likely have little interest in tech-
nologies that allow more accurate targeting of government-to-farmer payments. Where 
there is demand for better outcomes that dig-
ital technologies can help deliver, then several factors can boost demand for digital technol-
ogies, including: support for knowledge and 
skills development; ensuring development of relevant, customized digital tools in a suit-
able format and relevant languages; reducing 
the cost of adoption and facilitating access to finance if needed for adoption; and building 
trust in digital applications. Complementary 
infrastructure investments such as roads, en-ergy, and post-harvest storage can help link 
farmers to markets that would make several 
digital technologies more relevant to them.
Support farmer knowledge and skills, par-
ticularly those of poor farmers, women and other vulnerable groups. There is a high cor-
relation between digital adoption and basic 
skills. Investments to increase digital literacy and knowledge can help farmers take ad-
vantage of digital technologies.
107 Targeting 
support to poor farmers, especially wom-en, can help reduce disparities in adoption. 
Larger scale, better educated, and wealthier farmers are better positioned to take advan-
tage of digital technologies.
108 In addition, 
in low- and middle-income countries few-er women than men own a mobile phone or 
use the Internet.
109 Lack of digital literacy 
contributes to the gender gap in ICT us-
age.110,111 Support to farmers that are at risk 
of exclusion from digital technologies could be provided through extension and adviso-
ry services, with various forms of learning having different impacts on rural wom-
en.
112 Agricultural extension systems can 
also take advantage of digital technologies to disseminate information and knowledge 
as discussed earlier in this paper. In addition, 29
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESpublic-private partnerships can help farmers 
gain a presence on e-commerce platforms. 
For example, technical support was provid-
ed to melon farmers in the Xinjiang Region in China to improve the quality of their pro-
duce, support online promotion, and manage 
logistics shipments to clients.
Develop relevant customized tools in a 
suitable format and relevant languages. For example, in Ghana, the Talking Book, a 
behavior change initiative, experienced high 
adoption rates by providing 140 hours of au-dio content about agriculture and other rural 
issues in local languages to illiterate people 
via a low-cost audio computer. From 2008 to 2015, the number of people who used Talking 
Books increased from 1,000 to 175,000 in 
Ghana alone. In 2012, the average harvest of a farmer that had used a Talking Book in-
creased by 36 percent after one year.
113 In 
Rwanda, an e-wallet initiative for farmers experienced low uptake because SMS mes-
sages were sent in English rather than in Kinyarwanda.
114 To identify potential users’ 
needs correctly it is crucial to include par-
ticipatory approaches in digital agriculture 
initiatives.115 A needs assessment conducted 
for the Kubere Centre in Uganda indicat-
ed that women were primarily interested in 
farming techniques, market prices for farmer produce, and health and education issues.
116 
Consequently, this information was provid-
ed through radio and mobile phones used 
by women. Digital technologies can be de-signed to enable smallholder farmers with 
low cognitive skills to learn and upgrade 
their skills as they use them. This process en-courages inclusion rather than displacement 
of low-skilled smallholders and helps raise 
their productivity.Reduce the costs of digital technology adoption. The fees that farmers pay for digital 
services seem to influence adoption rates.
117 
The public good nature of a particular digi -
tal service needs to be reflected in its price for farmers, particularly for women farmers. For 
example, if the objective of mobile-phone-
based market information programs for poor rural areas is to improve equity, shouldn’t this 
information be provided for free as a pub
-
lic service cost to government? These types of 
public subsidies should not displace private 
sector activity, but in areas of high poverty 
with low ability to pay, displacement may not be a concern. Another policy that can help 
reduce the cost of digital services is to low
-
er the cost of expanding network coverage to 
rural areas, as noted earlier in the paper.
Improve access to financial services. 
Finance for agriculture through commercial 
banks remains limited; for example, about 
1 percent of commercial credit in Africa goes to agriculture. Microfinance institutions in 
several countries do serve rural households 
but at a relatively high cost, and governments often step in through policies, regulations, 
and state financial institutions. Despite good 
intentions, some of these measures do not achieve the intended outcomes, and may in
-
stead hinder the sustainable provision of financial services for agriculture, while also 
failing to crowd-in private sector participa
-
tion. In most countries, despite government 
intervention, agriculture attracts credit well 
below its contribution to GDP . Among key 
issues for preventing the spread of financial services in rural areas and agriculture are a 
high cost to serve clients in remote areas (with 
seasonal and small transactions), and percep
-
tions of risk due to lack of agroclimatic data 30
FUTURE OF FOODand financial records. Digital technologies 
can help in providing solutions to both these 
issues. Digital financial services, through mo -
bile phones, ATMs, Internet-banking, and 
agent banking, can reach smallholder farm -
ers in remote areas at very low cost. In terms of risks, digital technologies can provide in
-
formation on agroclimatic risks, enabling providers of financial services to assess the 
riskiness of production that their clients 
face. In addition, digital payments and other transactions that use digital platforms gener
-
ate financial records that can help providers of financial services assess credit risks for 
these clients where other forms of financial 
records do not exist.
Invest in complementary infrastructure and policies that increase incentives to 
invest. Lack of complementary rural in-
frastructure, such as roads, energy, post-har-vest storage, and logistics can limit adoption 
and impact of digital technologies in agri-culture.
118 For instance, it is difficult to sell 
products on e-commerce platforms if there are no roads to markets, or to sell high-qual-
ity fruits to online customers if there is no storage to preserve their freshness for distant 
markets. A recent study in China indicated 
that poor storage and transportation, par-ticularly for perishable products, was a fac-
tor in decisions not to sell products online.
119 
In addition, rural electrification can help fa-cilitate rural-based food processing and val-
ue addition. Some of these sectors (roads, electrification, and storage) may be able to 
crowd-in private investment, and could be 
the subject of their own “cascade” consider-ations of public-private investment (see ta-
ble 1) but that is beyond the scope of this 
paper. In addition, there are also significant policy improvements countries can make to 
increase incentives of farmers and agribusi-
nesses to invest in farms and across agri-cultural value chains,
120 which, in turn, can 
increase demand for digital technologies.
31
MAXIMIZING FINANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT IN AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS
Implementation using an MFD approach 
requires a more private sector-oriented 
perspective and public-private dialogue in-
formed by ex-ante analytics and data on constraints and opportunities
121 to enhance 
digital technologies to improve food sys-
tem outcomes. This approach can help guide 
the prioritization of public sector actions, particularly on efficiency, equity, and en-
vironmental impacts, and to address risks 
associated with digital technologies such as potential exclusion, lack of data privacy, mar-
ket concentration of service providers, and 
cybersecurity breaches. Targeting public sup-port and efforts to improve data privacy are 
two aspects worth reiterating. 
• Targeting public support to foster digital 
inclusion in the food system should be a 
key consideration, with particular atten -
tion to disadvantaged groups. This pro -
cess includes: expanding network coverage Implementation considerations
to more remote rural areas; supporting 
youth and women entrepreneurs with 
mentoring and technical support; improv -
ing the skills of smallholder farmers to 
better take advantage of digital technol -
ogies; and fostering development of dig -
ital technologies, including government e-services, customized to the needs and 
general skills levels of farmers, delivered 
in suitable formats and relevant languages. Women are particularly disadvantaged as 
regards access to, use and control of digital 
tools, especially in developing countries.
122 
Programs can be designed to have signif -
icant impacts on women. For example, recent support connected women farm
-
ers with agricultural market platforms in Bihar, India. The project organized wom
-
en farmers into their own producer com -
pany and supported them with a host of services: daily commodity price informa
-
tion via mobile phones; digital scales and 32
FUTURE OF FOODelectronic moisture meters to challenge 
manipulated equipment of traders; access 
to an online commodity exchange allow -
ing them to sell anywhere in the country; 
and improved access to storage and ware -
housing so they could delay selling until prices improved. These interventions re
-
sulted in a 20 percent increase in the prod -
uct prices the women farmers received. Beyond individual programs, digital inno
-
vations should be mainstreamed into na -
tional strategies in a gender-sensitive way to help advance the processes of women’s 
social inclusion. There is also a need to col
-
lect gender-disaggregated data to analyze 
how women and men access digital tools 
and use them for agriculture-related ac -
tivities, and how access for women can be 
improved.
• Data privacy considerations. Efforts to 
improving data privacy should give con-
sideration to three underlying principles: 
(i) transparency in data collection, in other words, individuals should know if 
someone is collecting their data; (ii) in-
dividuals need to know and have a voice in how their data are being used; and 
(iii) data sharing models need to work 
for both data suppliers (individuals) and users (enterprises/companies). Data gov-
ernance arrangements should serve to 
build confidence and trust of users of digital technologies, such as farmers and 
agribusinesses, and help facilitate devel-
opment of digital applications that can benefit these farmers and agribusinesses, 
such as improving access to finance, as 
discussed earlier in the paper. 
Multi-agency and multisectoral collabo -
ration, and the role of ministries of agri -culture. While implementation will require collaboration and action across government 
ministries—including communication, fi
-
nance, education, rural development, and 
transportation—agriculture ministries need 
to play a more prominent role in enhanc -
ing digital technologies to improve food sys -
tem outcomes. To achieve this, agriculture 
ministries need to: (i) engage with the pri -
vate sector to develop a clear and mutual un -
derstanding of constraints and opportuni -
ties to enhancing digital technologies in the food system; (ii) engage with other minis
-
tries and provide a voice to policies and in -
vestments needed in the food system such as digital and other infrastructure, invest
-
ment climate, digital skills development, and entrepreneurship programs, as well as facil
-
itate government-to-government data shar -
ing and linkages; (iii) provide direct support through e-extension to farmers, digital skills 
development programs, market information 
services, matching grants for facilitating dig
-
ital entrepreneurship, and programs to sup -
port women farmers, such as the Bihar exam -
ple cited above; and (iv) digitize some of their own systems including government-to-farm
-
er payments (e-vouchers), early warning and risk management systems, and M&E. 
Countries need to tailor actions to spe-cific local conditions. Prioritizing actions 
across supply-side constraints (such as a lack 
of network coverage and limited digital con-tent), and demand-side constraints (such as 
lack of knowledge or complementary in-
vestments) will obviously depend on which of these aspects is most pressing in a spe-
cific location. For example, some countries 
have lower digital applications per person than their network coverage would seem 33
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESto suggest, based on cross-country com-
parisons, indicating perhaps that relatively 
more attention should be given to entrepre-
neurship to develop digital applications and content in these cases, especially for small-
holders. While other countries have higher 
digital applications per person than their network coverage would seem to suggest, in-
dicating perhaps relatively more attention 
should be given to expanding network cov-erage relative to entrepreneurship. 
Digital technologies have the potential to transform the food system through better 
informed and engaged consumers, smart
-
er farms, and improved delivery of public 
services. Digital technologies also pose sev -
eral risks, including exclusion, lack of data privacy, cybersecurity breaches, and over
-
concentration of service provider market power. Addressing these risks calls for pub
-
lic policies that: keep service provider entry barriers low; ensure good data governance; 
foster inclusion through targeted support to smallholder farmers, youth, women, and 
other vulnerable groups; and support skills 
development and training. Public policy 
should also focus on creating an enabling environment that will create effective de
-
mand for digital technologies that deliver improved food system outcomes. Through 
monitoring uptake of these technologies, 
public actions can focus on resolving bot
-
tlenecks that prevent the market from responding to demand, such as: investing in 
digital entrepreneurship, human capital de
-
velopment, and supporting infrastructure; 
encouraging private sector competition to 
improve the availability of digital technolo -
gies and lower costs of adoption; regulating 
the use of digital technologies to reduce po -
tentially harmful uses; and in some cases, subsidizing the use of digital technologies 
by disadvantaged groups to ensure that they 
do not fall even further behind. These ac
-
tions can all harness digital technologies to provide much-needed improvements in 
food system outcomes.
34
FUTURE OF FOOD
35
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMES
Endnotes
1. World Bank, Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2018: 
Piecing Together the Poverty Puzzle (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018).
2. Ibid.
3. FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP , and WHO, The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2018: Building Climate Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition (Rome: Food & Agriculture Org., 2018).
4. FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of  
the United Nations), The State of Food and Agriculture 2013: Food Systems for Better Nutrition (Rome: FAO, 2013).
5. Development Initiatives, 2018 Global Nutrition Report: Shining a Light to Spur Action on Nutrition (Development Initiatives Poverty Research Ltd, Bristol, 2018).
6. WHO, WHO Estimates of the Global Burden of Foodborne Diseases: Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group 2007–2015 (Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2015).
7. ILO (International Labor Organization) data.
8. UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization) data.
9. Based on 2013 Eurostat data that separates manufacturing into 24 subsectors; Food Drink Europe, “Data and Trends: EU Food and Drink Industry 2016”.
10. E. Nkonya, A. Mirzabaev, and J. Von Braun, eds., Economics of Land Degradation and Improvement: A Global Assessment For Sustainable Development (Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2016).
11. A. Richey, B. Thomas, MH. Lo, et al., “Quantifying Renewable Groundwater Stress with GRACE,” Water Resources Research 51, no. 7 (2015): 5217–238.
12. E. Cassou, S. Jaffee, and J. Ru, The Challenge of Agricultural Pollution: Evidence from China,  Vietnam, and the Philippines (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018).
13. T. Searchinger, R. Waite, C. Hanson, J. Ranganathan, P . Dumas, and E. Matthews, Creating a Sustainable Future: A Menu of Solutions to Feed 
Nearly 10 Billion People by 2050 (Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 2018).
14. Ibid.
15. GSMA, The Mobile Economy 2018 (London: GSMA 2018).
16. Ibid.
17. GSMA, Enabling Rural Coverage: Regulatory and 
Policy Recommendations to Foster Mobile Broadband 
Coverage in Developing Countries (London: GSMA, 2018).
18. Digital technologies are a subset of agricultural 
technologies.
19. Finistere Ventures, “2018 Agtech Investment 
Review,” available at: https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/finistere-ventures-2018-agtech-investment-review.
20. McKinsey Global Institute Analysis.
21. H. Sekabira and M. Qaim, “Can Mobile Phones Improve Gender Equality and Nutrition? Panel Data Evidence from Farm Households in Uganda,” Food Policy 73 (2017): 95–103.
22. D. Acemoglu, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and Wage Inequality, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, no. 4 (1998): 1055–89.
23. C. Goldin and L. Katz, The Race Between Education and Technology (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2009).
24. S. Cole and A. Fernando, “‘Mobile’izing Agricultural Advice: Technology Adoption, Diffusion and 
Sustainability,” Harvard Business School Finance 
Working Paper 13–047 (2016).
25. M. Keogh and M. Henry, “The Implications  of Digital Agriculture and Big Data for  Australian Agriculture” (Australian Farm Institute, 
Sydney,
 2016).
26. M. Jouanjean, “Digital Opportunities for Trade in 
the Agriculture and Food Sectors” OECD Food, 
Agriculture and Fisheries Papers no. 122 (2019).36
FUTURE OF FOOD27. World Economic Forum, Innovation with a Purpose: 
The Role of Technology Innovation in Accelerating Food Systems Transformation (Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2018).
28. M. Jouanjean, “Digital Opportunities for Trade in the Agriculture and Food Sectors” OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers No. 122 (2019).
29. M. Tripoli and J. Schmidhuber, “Emerging Opportunities for the Application of Blockchain in the Agri-food Industry” (FAO and ICTSD: Rome and Geneva, License: CC BY-NC-SA 3 2018).
30. V. Martchenko, J. Cook, and M. Shirazi, (Scott Automation and Robotics), “Hyperspectral Food Safety Inspection System: Final Report,” Meat and Livestock Australia (2016).
31. Tellspec, “How Ripe is My Fruit?” 2018, http://tellspec.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Tellspec_FruitQC.pdf.
32. World Economic Forum, Innovation with a Purpose: The Role of Technology Innovation in Accelerating Food Systems Transformation (Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2018).
33. S. Jaffee, S. Henson, L. Unnevehr, D. Grace, and E. Cassou, The Safe Food Imperative: Accelerating Progress in Low-and Middle-Income Countries (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018).
34. YZ. Feng and DW. Sun, “Application of Hyperspectral Imaging in Food Safety Inspection and Control: A Review,” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 52, no. 11 (2012): 1039–58.
35. J. Aker and M. Fafchamps, “Mobile Phone Coverage and Producer Markets: Evidence from West Africa,” The World Bank Economic Review 29, no. 2 (2015): 262–92.
36. E. Nakasone, M. Torero, and B. Minten, “The Power of Information: The ICT Revolution in Agricultural Development,” Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 6, no. 1 (2014): 533–50.
37. T. Mitchell, “Is Knowledge Power? Competition and Information in Agricultural Markets,” No. iiisdp456. IIIS, (2014).
38. J. Huang and H. Zhi, “The Uses of ICT in Agriculture and E-commerce in Rural China: The Evidence from Village and Household Surveys.,” Background Paper 
(World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
39. U. Deichmann, A. Goyal, and D. Mishra, “Will Digital Technologies Transform Agriculture in Developing Countries?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7669 (2016).
40. E. Nakasone and M. Torero, “A Text Message 
Away: ICTs as a Tool to Improve Food Security,” 
Agricultural Economics 47, no. S1 (2016): 49–59.
41. World Bank, ICT in Agriculture: Connecting 
Smallholders to Knowledge, Networks, and Institutions (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017).
42. Digital Green. Annual Report 2017.
43. K. Toyama, R. Gandhi, R. Veeraraghavan, and V. Ramprasad, “Digital Green: Participatory Video and Mediated Instruction for Agricultural,” Information Technologies and International Development 5, no. 1 (2009): 1–15.
44. E. Nakasone and M. Torero, “A Text Message Away: ICTs as a Tool to Improve Food Security,” Agricultural Economics 47, no. S1 (2016): 49–59.
45. Ibid.
46. World Bank, ICT in Agriculture (Updated Edition): 
Connecting Smallholders to Knowledge, Networks, and 
Institutions (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017).
47. D. Schimmelpfennig, “Farm Profits and Adoption of Precision Agriculture,” USDA Economic Research Report 217. (2016).
48. M. Tulsian and N. Saini. “Market–driven innovations in rural marketing in 
India.” International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research 5, no. 5 (2014): 1439–45.
49. World Bank, ICT in Agriculture (Updated Edition) 2017.
50. K. Kennedy Freeman and R. Orejas, “Information 
Systems for Sustainable Agriculture, Uruguay.,” 
in M. Sewadeh and S. Jaffee (ed.), Shades of Green: Multi-Stakeholder Initiatives to Reduce the 
Environmental Footprint of Commercial Agriculture 
(EcoAgriculture Partners 2015).
51. J. Van Loon, A. Speratti, and B. Govaerts. “Precision for smallholder farmers: a small-scale-tailored 37
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMESvariable rate fertilizer application kit.” Agriculture 8, 
no. 4 (2018): 48.
52. F. Adu-Baffour, T. Daum, and R. Birner, “Can Big Companies’ Initiatives to Promote Mechanization Benefit Small Farms in Africa? A Case Study from Zambia” ZEF-Discussion Papers on Development Policy no. 262 (2018).
53. P . Courtois and J. Subervie, “Farmer Bargaining Power and Market Information Services,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 97, no. 3 (2014): 953–77.
54. E. Nakasone, “The Role of Price Information in Agricultural Markets: Experimental Evidence from Rural Peru,” Paper presented at the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association (AAEA) & Canadian Agricultural Economics Association (CAES) Joint Annual Meeting. Washington DC. 4–6 August 2013.
55. Ibid.
56. J. Aker, “Does Digital Divide or Provide? The Impact of Cell Phones on Grain Markets in Niger,” Center for Global Development Working Paper 154 (2008).
57. J. Aker and M. Fafchamps, “How Does Mobile Phone Coverage Affect Farm-Gate Prices? Evidence from West Africa” (Department of Economics and the Fletcher School, Tufts University, Massachusetts, 2010).
58. E. Nakasone and M. Torero, “A Text Message Away: ICTs as a Tool to Improve Food Security,” Agricultural Economics 47, no. S1 (2016): 49–59.
59. Ibid.
60. P . Varangis, M. Kioko, M. Spahr, et al., Access to Finance for Smallholder Farmers: Learning from the Experiences of Microfinance Institutions in Latin America (English) (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2014).
61. O. Kirui, J. Okello, R. Nyikal, and G. Njiraini, “Impact of Mobile Phone-Based Money Transfer Services in Agriculture: Evidence from Kenya,” Quarterly Journal of International Agriculture 52, no. 892–2016–65177:141 (2013).
62. W. Jack and T. Suri, “Mobile Money: The Economics of M-PESA,” NBER Working Paper no. 16721 (2011).63. Ibid.
64. World Bank, Global Financial Development Report 
2017/2018: Bankers without Borders (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018).
65. “Big data” is an evolving term that describes a large volume of structured, semi-structured and unstructured data that have the potential to be mined for information and used in machine learning projects and other advanced analytics applications.
66. E. Kärner, “The Future of Agriculture is Digital: Showcasting e-Estonia,” Frontiers in Veterinary Science 4: 151 (2017).
67. J. Grossman and M. Tarzai, “Serving Smallholder Farmers: Recent Developments in Digital Finance” (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, Washington, DC, 2014).
68. Ibid.
69. IFAD, “Statement by Dr. Akinwumi Adesina, Honourable Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, Federal Republic of Nigeria, Governor from Nigeria, at the 36th Session of the IFAD Governing Council” (2013).
70. World Bank, “Promoting Digital Agriculture: Case of E-voucher Program Implementation in Three West African Countries,” World Bank Memo (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2019).
71. Machine learning is a method of data analysis that automates analytical model building. It is a branch of artificial intelligence based on the idea that systems can learn from data, identify patterns, and make decisions with minimal human intervention.
72. R. Townsend, L. Ronchi, C. Brett, and G. Moses, “Future of Food: Maximizing Finance for Development in Agricultural Value Chains.” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
73. GSMA data.
74. Ibid.
75. Frontier Economics, “Benefits of Network Competition and Complementary Policies to Promote Mobile Broadband Coverage,” Prepared for GSMA (GSMA, London, 2015).
76. Ibid.38
FUTURE OF FOOD77. GSMA data and World Development Indicators.
78. Frontier Economics, “Benefits of Network 
Competition and Complementary Policies to Promote Mobile Broadband Coverage,” Prepared for GSMA (GSMA, London, 2015).
79. Ibid.
80. P . Buys, S. Dasgupta, T. Thomas, and D. Wheeler, “Determinants of a Digital Divide in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Spatial Econometric Analysis of Cell Phone Coverage,” World Development 37, no. 9 (2009): 1494–505.
81. Ibid.
82. World Bank, Enabling the Business of Agriculture 2017 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017).
83. GSMA, Enabling Rural Coverage: Regulatory  and Policy Recommendations to Foster Mobile Broadband Coverage in Developing Countries (London: GSMA, 2018).
84. World Bank, Enabling the Business of Agriculture 2017.
85. The Enabling the Business of Agriculture ICT indicator focuses on the licensing framework for mobile operators and assesses the type of licensing regime used in a country, the validity of the operating license, the public availability of operating license costs, and spectrum allocation.
86. R. Samarajiva and A. Zainudeen. “Regulatory Reform and Rural Roll-Out of Information and Communication Technologies,” in A. Jhunjhunwala (ed.), Information Technology and Communication Resources for Sustainable Development (UNESCO in partnership with Encyclopedia Life Support Systems, 2010).
87. S. Parsons and J. Stegeman, “Rural Broadband Economics: A Review of Rural Subsidies” (Cincinnati: CostQuest Associates, 2018).
88. J. Genachowski, “Bringing Broadband to Rural America: Update to Report on a Rural Broadband Strategy,” Federal Communications Commission, GN Docket 11–16 (2011).
89. Using GSMA data.
90. Digital technologies are a subset of agricultural technologies.91. Disrupt Africa, “Agrinnovating for Africa: Exploring the African Agri-Tech Startup Ecosystem Report 2018” (Disrupt Africa, 2018).
92. World Bank, World Development Report 2016. Digital Dividends (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2016).
93. Ibid.
94. A. Brunetti, G. Kisunko, and B. Weder, “Credibility of Rules and Economic Growth: Evidence from a Worldwide Survey of the Private Sector,” The World Bank Economic Review 12, no. 3 (1998): 353–84.
95. PwC, “Global Blockchain Survey 2018” (PwC, 2018).
96. GSMA, A New Regulatory Framework for the Digital Ecosystem (London: GSMA, 2016).
97. M. Keogh and M. Henry, “The Implications of Digital Agriculture and Big Data for Australian Agriculture” 
(Australian Farm Institute, Sydney,
 2016).
98. EU Code of Conduct on Agricultural Data Sharing 
by Contractual Agreement.
99. J. De Beer, “Ownership of Open Data: Governance Options for Agriculture and Nutrition” (Wallingford: Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition, 2016).
100. M. Trajtenberg, “AI as the Next GPT: a Political-Economy Perspective,” NBER Working Paper no. 24245 (2018).
101. Using GSMA data
102. FAO, “FAO Private and Public Partnership Model for Youth Employment in Agriculture. Experiences from Malawi, Tanzania Mainland, and Zanzibar Archipelago,” Rural Employment Case Studies Series 4 (FAO, Rome, 2014).
103. J. Kluve, S. Puerto, D. Robalino, et al., “Do Youth Employment Programs Improve Labor Market Outcomes? A Quantitative Review,” World Development 114 (2019): 237–53.
104. Finistere Ventures, 2017 Agtech Investment Review.
105. L. Klapper, “How Digital Payments Can Benefit Entrepreneurs,” IZA World of Labor 396 (2017).
106. R. Zong, “China Can’t Afford a Cashless Society. A Mania for Mobile Payments is Leaving the Poor Behind,” Foreign Policy, September 11 (2018).39
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMES107. World Bank, World Development Report 2016. Digital 
Dividends (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2016).
108. World Bank, “The Role of Agriculture on Romania’s Path to Prosperity,” Input to Romania Systematic Country Diagnostic (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
109. GSMA, Connected Women. The Mobile Gender Gap 
Report 2018 (GSMA: London,
 2018).
110. J. Aker, I. Ghosh, and J. Burrell. “The 
promise (and pitfalls) of ICT for agriculture initiatives.” Agricultural Economics 47, no. S1 (2016): 35–48.
111. GSMA, Connected Women. The Mobile Gender Gap 
Report 2018 (GSMA: London,
 2018).
112. K. Vasilaky and A. Islam, “Competition or 
Cooperation? Using Team and Tournament Incentives for Learning among Female Farmers in Rural Uganda,” World Development 103 (2018): 216–25.
113. S. Treinen, A. Van der Elstraeten, and C. Pedrick, Gender and ICTs: Mainstreaming Gender in the Use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for Agriculture and Rural Development (Rome: FAO, 2018).
114. J. Grossman and M. Tarazi, “Serving Smallholder Farmers: Recent Developments in Digital Finance,” CGAP Focus Note 94 (2014).
115. S. Treinen, A. Van der Elstraeten, and C. Pedrick, Gender and ICTs: Mainstreaming Gender in the Use of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (Rome: FAO, 2018).
116. IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural 
Development), Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009).
117. G. Palloni, J. Aker, D. Gilligan, M. Hidrobo, and N. Ledlie, “Paying for Digital Information: Assessing Farmers Willingness to Pay for a Digital Agriculture and Nutrition Service in Ghana” Paper presented 
at International Association of Agricultural Economists Conference. Vancouver, British 
Columbia. 28 July-2 August 2018.
118. U. Deichmann, A. Goyal, and D. Mishra, “Will Digital Technologies Transform Agriculture in 
Developing Countries?” World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper no. 7669 (2016).
119. J. Huang and H. Zhi, “The Uses of ICT in Agriculture and E-commerce in Rural China: The 
Evidence from Village and Household Surveys.,” 
Background Paper (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
120. R. Townsend, L. Ronchi, C. Brett, and G. Moses, “Future of Food: Maximizing Finance for Development in Agricultural Value Chains.” (World 
Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
121. Ibid.
122. ITU (International Telecommunication Union), ICT 
Facts and Figures 2017(Geneva: ITU, 2017).40
FUTURE OF FOOD
41
HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMES42
FUTURE OF FOOD
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USAT elephone: 202-473-1000
