  Impact  
Evaluation  
Report 92Rohini Pande
Anant Sudarshan
 Governance Ha rnessing transparency initiatives 
to improve India’s environmental 
clearance process for the mineral mining sector    
 March 2019
 About  3ie 
The International  Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) promotes  evidence -informed 
equitable, inclusive and sustainable development. We support the generation and 
effective use of high-quality  evidence to inform  decision-making and improve the lives of 
people living  in poverty  in low- and middle-income  countries. We provide guidance and 
support to produce, synthesise and quality -assure  evidence of what works,  for whom,  
how, why and at what cost. 
3ie impact  evaluations 
3ie-supported impact evaluations  assess the difference a development intervention has 
made to social  and economic  outcomes. 3ie is committed to funding rigorous  evaluations  
that include a theory -based design, use the most  appropriate mix of methods  to capture 
outcomes  and are useful  in complex  development contexts.  
About  this report  
3ie accepted the final version of the report, Harnessing transparency  initiatives  to 
improve India ’s environmental  clearance process  for the mineral  mining sector, as partial  
fulfilment of requirements  under  grant TW8R2.1017, awarded under  Thematic  Window 8, 
Transparency  and Accountability  in Natural  Resource Governance. The content has 
been copy -edited and formatted for publication by 3ie.  
The 3ie technical  quality  assurance team  for this report comprises Francis  Rathinam, 
Kanika Jha Kingra, an anonymous  external  impact  evaluation design expert reviewer 
and an anonymous  external  sector expert reviewer, with overall  technical  supervision by 
Marie  Gaarder. The 3ie editorial  production team  for this report c omprises  Sahib Singh 
and Akarsh Gupta, with Beryl Leach providing overall  editorial  supervision. 
All of  the content is the sole responsibility  of the authors  and does  not represent the 
opinions  of 3ie, its donors  or its board of commissioners. Any errors a nd omissions  are 
also the sole responsibility  of the authors. All affiliations  of the authors  listed in the title 
page are those that were  in effect at  the time the report was accepted. Please direct any 
comments  or queries  to the corresponding author, Rohini Pande at 
rohini_pande@hks.harvard.edu. 
Funding for this impact evaluation was provided by 3ie’s donor, UK aid through the 
Department for International Development.  
Suggested citation: Pande, R and Su darshan, A, 2019, Harnessing transparency  
initiatives  to improve India's  environmental  clearance process  for the mineral  mining 
sector, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 92. New Delhi:  International  Initiative for Impact 
Evaluation (3ie). Available at: https://doi.org/10.23846/TW8IE92 
Cover photo: Dinodia Photos / Alamy Stock Photo 
 © International  Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), 2019   Harnessing  transparency  initiatives to improve  India ’s 
environmental  clearance process for  the mineral  mining sector 
 
Rohini Pande 
Harvard Kennedy  School  
Anant Sudarshan 
University  of Chicago 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Impact  Evaluation  Report  92 
March  2019  
 
  
 
i Acknowledgments  
Research discussed  in this paper  is funded by UK aid through the Department for 
International  Development (DFID ), the International  Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) 
and the Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries  (PEDL) research 
initiative, a programme funded jointly  by the by the Centre for Economic  Policy  Research 
(CEPR) and  DFID,  contract re ference PEDL_LOA_3942_Pande. 3ie quality  assured the 
evaluation proposal, the pre-analysis  plan and the final impact  evaluation report.  
The views  expressed in the report are not necessarily  those of DFID,  CEPR or 3ie.  
We are grateful  to Anca Balietti, Su joy Bhattacharyya, Lucy  Page and Kevin  Rowe  for 
excellent research assistance, and to Evidence for Policy  Design India at the Institute  for 
Financial  Management and Research, a joint program me by Evidence for Policy  Design 
at Harvard Kennedy  School  and the Institute for  Financial  Management and Research.  
  ii Summary  
This project  aims  to evaluate the 2006 environmental  clearance (EC) reforms  in India.  
The EC process, which  requires  all major capital  investment projects  by the private 
sector or government to seek regulatory  approval  prior to beginning construction, is the 
centrepiece for environmental  regulation of development in India. While  the EC process  
applies  across sectors  of the economy, it plays  a particularly  important role in oversight 
of the mining sector, where  environmental  impacts  are diffuse and diverse.  
In this paper, we pursue two objectives. First, we  seek  to provide proof of concept for the 
use of remote sensing data to monitor mines’  environmental  compliance.  We match a 
wide set of publicly  available administrative data on mines’  clearance applications  with 
satellite data on pollution and vegetation coverage to show  how these free, publicly  
available data can supplement regulators’  site visits  in a low-resource environment such 
as India. Using these data, we measure mines’  environmental  performance as the 
change in environmental  conditions  from two years  pre-clearance to two years  post-
clearance.  
One methodological  innovation is that we  identify  the timing of deforestation at individual  
mine s using  structural  breaks  in a time series  of vegetation coverage, allowing us to 
assess compliance with the requirement that mines  break  ground only after receiving 
clearance. In a low-resource environment such as  India, remote-sensed data on 
environmental outcomes  may provide  low-cost  tools  to supplement more  expensive 
forms  of monitoring by regulators, such as  site visits  to mines. In India’s  EC process,  
satellite-based tools  could  be useful  in assessing  sites for clearance during the 
application  process  and in monitoring compliance with post- clearance conditions.  
Next, we  us e our broad data repository  to evaluate the impacts  of a set of substantial  
reforms  to the EC process  enacted in 2006. These reforms  sought to bring  greater  
transparency  and accountability  to the EC process  by subjecting larger  projects  to 
additional  scrutiny  from regulators, independent experts  and the public. The reforms  
required projects  to seek  site-specific  terms  of reference for their environmental  impact  
assessments,  decentrali sed smaller projects  to state-level  clearance bodies, and 
established expert clearance bodies  at the state and central  levels  to review  clearance 
applications.   
We provide suggestive evidence of the impacts  of the overall  reforms . First, we find that 
mine  proponents  appear  to have shifted to smaller  mine  sizes  to avoid a costly  reform. 
Second, we find that mines  that applied for clearance after the reform  experienced 
substantially  shorter clearance but were  more  likely  to deforest illegally  before receiving 
clearance.  Besides  providing descriptive evidence on the impacts  of the overall  reforms, we use a 
historical  discontinuity  in clearance requirements  to evaluate one crucial  aspect of reform 
– an expanded requirement that mines  hold a public  hearing before applying for 
clearance. A large body  of qualitative work  suggests  that public  consultation may be a 
key component of an effective EC process. However, we are aware of no prior 
quantitative work  evaluating the impact of public  hearings. We evaluate the impact of iii embedding public  hearings  in the EC process  by exploiting a discontinuity  in the 
historical  clearance process  for mines  with areas of 25 hectares .  
Although mines  of area greater than 25 hectares  were  required to hold public  hearings  
under  the historical  clearance process,  mines  less than 25 hectares  in area were  first 
required to hold hearings  after the 2006 clearance notification. For mines  above and 
below  the 25-hectare cut-off, the only differential  change in the EC process  around the 
date of the 2006 notification is the additional  requirement of a public  hearing for mines  
less than 25 hectares . Therefore, we can evaluate the impact of public  hearings  by 
estimating a difference-in -difference model , comparing mines  less than and greater than 
25 hectares  that applied before and after the 2006 reform  notification.  
Broadly, we seek  to estimate the impact of the expanded public  hearing requirement on 
the costs  and benefits  of the clearance process. In particular,  we measure the costs  of 
clearance to mines as the self-reported total mine  costs  and duration of the EC process, 
although this measure captures  only the period after mines  complete the public  hearing 
and submit all materials  to the Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEFCC). We quantify  the benefits  of the clearance process  as mines’  environmental  
performance, which  we proxy  as air pollution, water pollution and extent of vegetative 
coverage, using our remote sensing data. 
We fi nd no evidence that the additional  public  hearing requirements  under  the 2006 
reforms  significantly  altered either the costs  or benefits  of the EC process.  We find some  
significant time trends  around the date of the notification: mines  that applied for 
clearance after the 2006  notification experienced about 31 per cent shorter EC duration, 
were  19 percentage points  more  likely  to illegally  deforest before the date of clearance 
and had significantly  lower  increases  in some  measures  of water pollution around the 
date of clearance. We cannot interpret these t imes  trends  as the causal  impact of the 
2006 EC notification.  However, we do not find that the imposition of the public  hearing 
requirement on treatment mines  significantly  altered any of these time trends, so we can 
attribute no significant impacts  to public  hearings. 
Why do we fail to find significant results  for the impact of public  hearings? First, it  is 
important to note that our empirical  strategy  restricts  us to evaluating relatively  short-
term impacts  of the reform process  and that we may be limited by low power  due to our 
small  sample. Our analysis  is also limited in that some  of our measures  of clearance 
costs  and benefits  are imprecisely  measured: our measure of clearance  duration does  
not include the public  hearing period,  mine  costs  are self-rep orted and subject to 
extensive rounding, and our measures  of water quality  are often drawn from monitors  at 
a significant distance from mines. Finally, public  hearings  could  have benefits  that our 
data cannot capture. Although we have the data to evaluate mines’  environmental  
performance, for example, we lack the data to evaluate the impact of hearings  on other  
potential  benefits, such as  local employment or investment in local infrastructure.  
However, o ur null results  could also reflect real weaknesses  in either the  legislative 
provisions  or the implementation of the public  hearing requirement. Although the EC 
notification includes  a set of requirements  designed to ensure public  hearings  are 
informative and accessible, such as  requiring mines  to publicly  post the mine’s  draft 
environmental  impact assessment report 30 days  in advance, anecdotal  evidence iv suggests  that mines  frequently  fail to comply  with these requirements. Although we 
cannot test the  claim  that these shortfalls  in implementation account for the null impacts  
of public  hearings  on environmental  conditions, strengthening  mines’  compliance with 
the hearing protocol  could help to ensure that public  hearings  offer a platform  for 
substantive public  engagement.  
Finally, our extensive data collection process  has produced  important insights  into the 
role of data in monitoring mines  in India. As we have already  noted, our analysis  
highlights potential  gains  from using  free satellite data to measure mines’  environmental  
compliance in a low-cost  environment  such as  India. Our work  also highlights the 
importance of better synthesi s of publicly  available data on mines. Within the Indian 
government,  the Indian Bureau of Mines  and the MoEFCC  both regulate mining and 
publish records on mining leases  and clearance applications,  respectively, but their 
records  are unlinked. Establishing a central  mining database  that links mines  in these 
agencies’  systems  would enable more  meaningful  public  scrutiny  of mines  throughout 
their lifetimes, from  EC and lease application to mine  closure. 
 
  v Contents  
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................ i  
Summary ........................................................................................................................... ii 
List of figures and tables ................................................................................................ vi 
Abbreviations and acronyms  ........................................................................................ vii 
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1  
2. Intervention, theory  of change and research hypotheses ....................................... 4  
2.1 The EC process in India and the 2006 reforms  ...................................................... 4  
2.2 Public hearings in the EC process  .......................................................................... 8  
2.3 Theory of change  .................................................................................................. 10 
3. Context ........................................................................................................................ 14 
4. Timeline....................................................................................................................... 17 
5. Evaluation design, methods and implementation .................................................. 18 
5.1 Evaluating the 2006 EC reform: exploiting a cut-off at 25 hectares  ...................... 18 
5.2 Data collection  ...................................................................................................... 20 
5.3 Validation of outcome measures  .......................................................................... 23 
5.4 Analysis sample and power  .................................................................................. 25 
6. Impact analysis and results of the key evaluation questions ................................ 26 
6.1 Descriptive evidence on the 2006 reforms: selection  ........................................... 26 
6.2 Impacts of the 2006 EC reform  ............................................................................. 28 
6.3 Robustness checks and extensions  ..................................................................... 36 
7. Discussion .................................................................................................................. 38 
8. Specific findings for policy and practice ................................................................. 39 
Appendixes ..................................................................................................................... 42 
Online appendixes ......................................................................................................... 47 
References  ...................................................................................................................... 48 
 
  vi List of figures  and tables 
Figure 1: Schematic summary of regulatory changes of the 2006 EC notification  ............ 7  
Figure 2: Theory of change, 2006 EC reform  .................................................................. 14 
Figure 3: Event study, median annual EVI at mining site (250 m radius), mines obtaining 
clearance between 2006 and 2015 .................................................................. 23 
Figure 4: Event study, difference between annual PM 2.5 concentrations (μg/m3) at mine 
site (1 km radius) and surrounding area (50 km radius), opencast mines cleared 
2006– 2015 ....................................................................................................... 24 
Figure 5: New mining leases granted by lease area, 1990– 2013 ................................... 27 
Figure 6: Distribution of mine areas in our sample .......................................................... 28 
 
 
Table 1: Summary statistics for all mines in clearance letter data set  ............................ 16 
Table 2: Variables included in the Indian Bureau of Mines di rectory  .............................. 21 
Table 3: Change in median, maximum and minimum annual EVI, mines obtaining 
clearance between 2006 and 2015, mine and year of clearance fixed effects  . 24 
Table 4: Difference between annual PM 2.5 concentrations (μg/m3) at mining site (inner 
radius) and surrounding area (outer radius), opencast mines obtaining 
clearance between 2006 and 2015, mine and year of clearance fixed effects  . 25 
Table 5: Assessing compositional changes on observable mine characteristics  ............ 31 
Table 6: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform on clearance costs  ......................... 32 
Table 7: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform on deforestation at mines  .............. 34 
Table 8: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform on air and water pollution at mines  36 
 
Appendix figures and tables  
Figure B1: Calculated power assuming treatment effect on duration of 20 per cent  ....... 45 
 
Table A1: Research hypotheses, outcomes, variable construction  ................................ 42 
Table A2: Date each state’s SEAC established  .............................................................. 44 
Table C1: Regressions of EC duration and environmental performance on mine 
characteristics  ................................................................................................. 46 
 
  vii Abbreviations  and acronyms  
BOD  Biochemical oxygen demand  
CI Confidence interval  
EAC Expert Appraisal Com mittee 
EC  Environmental clearance 
EIA Environmental impact assessment  
EVI Enhanced vegetation index  
MoEFCC  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MTPA  Million tonnes per annum  
PM Fine particulate matter  
SEAC State Expert Appraisal Committee  
SEIAA State Environmental Impact Assessment Authority  
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
ToR Terms of reference 
TPA Tonnes per annum  
 
 1 1. Introduction  
Alongside dramatic  imagery  of urban air pollution  in cities  such as  Delhi  and Beijing, a 
growing focus  on environmental  health in economics  and epidemiology  has prompted a 
re-examination of environmental  policy  in many  rapidly  industriali sing countries. The 
Lancet Commission  on pollution and health estimates  that 9 million premature deaths  in 
2015 were  attributable to air, water and soil pollution globally, with a cost of US$4.6 
trillion,  or more  than 6 per cent of the world ’s gross  domestic  product (Landrigan et al. 
2017). The study  cites about 2.5 million  premature deaths  from pollution in India alone, 
the most  of any country.   
The primary challenge of mitigating the costs  of rapid industrial  development on health 
and the environment in India, as in many  other low- and middle -income countries  like it, 
is not in establishing new policies, but rather in implementing existing policies.  In the 
1970s  and 1980s, India adopted a strong policy  framework  for controlling air and water 
pollution, forest clearing and land use change. However, as India’s development has 
accelerated in the last 25 years, enforcement capacity  in its main  pollution control  
institutions  has been outpaced by the growth of polluting activities  (Duflo et al. 2013).  
Greenstone and c olleagues  (2015)  present evidence on the magnitude of this 
implementation gap and the consequences  for human health, finding t hat reducing 
ambient air pollution levels  to those specified  in current law would increase life 
expectancy  by at least 3.2 years  for 660 million people living  in the heavily  polluted north 
of India. While improving the capacity  of India’s environmental  regulatory  institutions  to 
carry out conventional  monitoring and enforcement strategies  requires  long-term  
structural  changes, transparency  initiatives  that provide public  access  to detailed 
information about industrial  activities  present a low-cost  channel  for potentially  improving 
the accountability  of polluting firms.  
The environmental clearance (EC) process, which  requires  all major capital  investment 
projects  by the private sector or government to seek  regulatory  approval  prior to 
beginning construction, is the centrepiece of environmental  regulation of development in 
India. The crux of the EC process  is an environmental impact assessment (EIA), an 
evaluation of likely  effects  arising from development projects  (Jay et al. 2007). Today, 
EIA-based clearance processes  are a fixture of environmental  regulation worldwide. The 
modern EIA was first instituted in the United States  with the National  Environmental  
Policy  Act of 1969, which  required all federal  government agencies  to ‘include in every  
recommendation f or major Federal  actions  significantly  affecting the quality  of the human 
environment, a detailed statement on … the environmental  impact of the proposed 
action’ (Section 102(2)(c)).  
Following its introduction  in the U nited States , the EIA process  was codified  into the 
requirements  of European Community member  states  in the mid-1980s, and the World  
Bank  ruled in 1989 that EIA should be carried out in all  borrower country  projects  under 
World Bank  supervision.  Other donor  agencies, such as the Asian Development Bank 
and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, have since  followed  
suit. In total,  EIA regulations  exist today  in more  than 100 countries  worldwide (Jay et al. 
2007).  2 EIA regulations  were  established in most  Asian countries  durin g the 1980s  and 1990s. 
India enacted its initial EC process  in 1986. A few  Asian countries, such as  Myanmar,  
still have no official  EIA regulations  in place, while  some, such as  Japan, Hong Kong and 
Korea, have  robust EIA systems  set within a broader  environmental  planning framework  
(Wood 2003). Broadly, EC processes  worldwide take the following steps: (i) screening, 
or filtering projects  into EC processes  of varying  stringency; (ii) scoping, or determining 
the set of environmental  risks the  EIA report should consider; (iii) preparation of the EIA 
report; and (iv) official  review  of the EIA report and decision to either grant or deny  an 
EC. 
In 2006, India enacted a set of key reforms  that sought to bring  greater  transparency  and 
accountability  to the EC process  by subjecting  larger projects  to additional  scrutiny  from 
regulators, independent experts  and the public. The reforms  required projects  to seek  
site-specific  terms of reference (ToR) for their EIAs, decentrali sed smaller projects  to 
state-level  clearance  bodies , and established expert clearance bodies  at both the state 
and central  levels  to review  clearance applications. One key provision of the 2006 
reforms  was to institute  a requirement that all projects  hold a public  hearing after 
undertaking the EIA and before submitting their clearance application to the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) . Previously,  only large projects  had 
been required to hold a public  hearing. 
By i ncreasing the scope for public  scrutiny  of projects, this expanded public  hearing 
requirement helped bring  much -needed transparency  to the EC process.  Indeed, 
previous  work  on EC processes  suggests  that public  involvement may be a key  to an 
effective clearance process  (Nadeem  and Hameed 2006). Many  developed countries  
incorporate public  comments  into both EIA drafting and review, and a growing number of 
developing countries, including India, require that project proponents  hold public  
hearings  during the EIA review  process  (Ahmad and Wood 2002).  
In theory, publi c consultation could improve environmental  and social  performance of 
development program mes by making project proponents  accountable to people. 
However, simply  holding public  hearings  may not be sufficient to ensure the public  has 
the opportunity  to push f or better and cleaner  development projects. Several  reviews  of 
EIA systems  caution that public  comment periods  are often inaccessible and ineffective 
in developing countries  (Zubair 2001). In Pakistan, for example, Nadeem  and Hameed 
(2008)  write  that publi c hearings  on EIAs are often held at fancy  hotels  in the city, far 
from those who will be affected by the project. In Colombia, public  participation is only 
elicited for projects  that directly  impact land inhabited by indigenous  people (Toro et al. 
2010). Bisset  (2000)  summari ses the obstacles  to effective public  consultation in low-
income countries: illiteracy, linguistic  diversity, gender  norms  that limit women’s  
participation, geographic  remoteness  and a lack of knowledge on the scale  and likely  
impacts  of various  development projects.  
In thi s  paper, we evaluate the impact of this expanded public  hearing requirement for 
ECs in India ’s mining sector. A transparent EC process  could play a particularly  
important role in oversight of the mining sector, where environmental  impacts  tend to be 
diverse and diffuse. M ines’ remote locations  make  frequent in-person monitoring by 
regulators  prohibitively  costly, unlike manufacturing or power  generators  in accessible  
industrial  clusters.  Furthermore, frequent land conflicts spurred by mining may make  3 public  consultation particularly  important in the mining sector (Rights  and Resources  
2016). Thus, we focus  our analysis  on the role of public  hearings in India’s mining sector.  
We evaluate the impact of embedding public  hearings  in the EC by exploiting a 
discontinuity  in the historical  clearance process  for mines  of an area of 25 hectares . 
Although mines  of area greater than 25 hectares  were  required to hold public  hearings  
under  the historical  clearance process,  mines  of area less than 25 hectares  were  first 
required to hold hearings  after the 2006 clearance notification. For mines  of area above 
and below  the 25 hectares cut-off, the  only differential  change in the EC process  around 
the date of the 2006 notification is the additional  requirement of a public  hearing for 
mines  less than 25 hectares . Therefore, we can evaluate the impact of public  hearings  
by estimating a difference-in -difference model  comparing mines  of area less than and 
greater than 25 hectares that applied  before and after the 2006 reform  notification. We 
seek  to evaluate the impact of public  hearings  on the costs  of the EC process, measured 
as mine  costs  and process  duration, and on mines’  environmental  performance. 
We find no evidence that the expanded public  hearing requirement significantly  
increased clearance costs  to mines. First, although mines  that applied after the 2006  EC 
reforms  had about 31 per cent shorter post-EIA duration than those that applied after the 
2006 reforms, we do not find that the public  hearing reform  significantly  altered either 
clearance duration or the mines’  stated total  costs. Furthermore, we find no evidence 
that the public  hearing requirement significantly  altered mines ’ environmental  
performance or compliance. While  mines  that applied for clearance after the 2006 
notification deforested about 1.3 years  earlier  relative to their date of clearance and were  
19 percentage points  more  likely  to illegally  deforest before receiving clearance, there 
was no differential  change for mines newly  subject to the public  hearing requirement. 
Similarly,  we find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement altered air or water 
pollution at mine  sites. While  we find that nearby  biochemical  oxygen demand (BOD) 
increased by a lesser margin after  clearance among mines  that applied after the 2006 
notification, we find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement altered mines’  air or 
water pollution. 
Overall, al though we document that mine  outcomes  changed significantly  around the 
date of the 2006 EC reform, we find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement 
significantly  altered either mine  costs  or environmental  performance. Why do we fail to 
find significant impacts ? First, our null results  may reflect real weaknesses  in 
implementation of the public  hearing requirement. Indeed, while  the 2006 reforms  
included broad guidelines  to ensure that hearings  would be accessible and informative to 
the public, anecdotal  evidence suggests  that proponents  often fail to comply  with these 
requirements. The hearings  may be held at inaccessible locations  or times, for  example, 
offering only a symbolic  opportunity  for consultation. Second, our empirical  strategy  
allows  us to evaluate only the short-term  impacts  of the expanded public  hearing 
requirement, so we may be failing to identify  longer-term  impacts.  
Besides  offering the first rigorous  evaluation of the 2006 clearance reforms, our report  
offers  a novel  contribution by introducing and validating a set of satellite-based 
monitoring tools  for EC. We use remote sensing data to measure air pollution and 
deforestation at mine  sites,  as well as water pollution in nearby  rivers. One particular  
methodological  innovation is that we identify  the timing of deforestation at individual  4 mines  using  structural  break s in a time series  of vegetation coverage, allowing us to 
assess compliance with the requirement that mines  break  ground only after receiving 
clearance. In a low-resource environment such as  India’s, environmental  monitoring 
using remote-sensed data on environmental  outcomes  could provide low-cost  monitoring 
tools  to supplement more  expensive monitoring site visits  at mines. We provide simple  
proof of concept for these monitoring tools.  
Our analysis  has shifted substantially  since  initially  designing a pre-analysis  plan. We 
first explored a partnership with the Gujarat Pollution Control  Board based on two 
interventions: providing regulators  with remote sensing-based tools  to monitor 
environmental  outcomes , and improving transparency  by creating a publicly  accessible  
website with detailed information on particular  mining projects. Subsequently, we 
pursued a partnership with the Ministry  of Mines  to evaluate the ministry ’s new star rating 
program me, which  grants  mines  ratings  based on environmental  conditions. However, 
the turnover of the ministry secretary earlier this year made it clear that this partnership 
would not develop soon enough to allow  us to proceed. Thus, we shifted our focus  to 
secondary  data-based analysis  of the 2006 EC reforms, the most  substantial  overhaul  of 
India’s clearance system  since  its initiation. While the methodology  of our study  has 
shifted from a randomi sed evaluation to secondary  data analysis, however, our project 
has remained focused on the impact of transparency  reforms  and the role for satellite-
based data tools  in monitoring EC at mines. 
The r eport is organi sed as follows. Section 2 details  the EC process  and 2006 reforms, 
presents  our research hypotheses  and describes  the theory  of change structuring our 
empirical  analysis. Section 3 situates  our analysis  in the context of India’s  mining sector. 
Section 4 details  the timeline  of the 2006 EC reforms. Section 5 describes  our 
identification  strategy, data collection process  and sample. Section 6 presents  the results  
of our empirical  analysis,  including a series  of robustness  checks and extensions. 
Section 7 is a discussion of findings and Section 8 provides recommendations to 
policymakers and researchers.  
2. Intervention,  theory  of change  and research  hypotheses  
2.1 The EC process in India and the 2006 reforms  
The EC process, which  requires  all development projects  to seek  regulatory  approval  
before breaking ground,  is the centrepiece of environmental  regulation in India. The 
initial  EC process, instituted in 1994, required all mines larger  than five hectares to apply  
for clearance at the central  level. Mines  would prepare an EIA based on standardi sed 
ToR, would hold a public  hearing for mines  of area greater than 25 hectares  and then 
submit the EIA and public  hearing report to the MoEFCC. The MoEFCC  would grant or 
deny  clearance, seeking expert input where necessary.  
In 2006, a notification by the MoEFCC  dramatically  overhauled this process, requiring 
more  scrutiny  of the projected environmental  and social  impacts  of projects  and greater 
transparency  in the approval  process. The reforms  decentrali sed the EC process  into a 
two-tiered system  where larger  projects  (known  as Category  A) pass  through a central  
process  and smaller  projects  (known  as Category  B) pass  through parallel  state-level  
processes. In the mining sector, mines  with lease areas  of 50 hectares  or more  are 5 considered Category  A projects, while  mines  of area between 5 and 50 hectares  are 
considered Category  B projects.1 
As part of this decentrali sation, the 2006 EC reforms  convened central - and state-level  
clearance bodies  that are responsible for reviewing EC applications; these review  bodies  
are known as central and state expert appraisal committees  (EACs) and are appointed 
by the MoEFCC  (Ghosh 2013). For Category  A applications,  EACs comprise  
representatives  from industry, civil society  and academia, who consider applications  on a 
monthly  basis  and issue  recommendations  to the MoEFCC, which  makes  the final 
decision to approve or deny  a clearance. An EAC is formed for each sector, and the 
EACs work  independently  of the MoEFCC  (Ghosh  2013).  
For Category  B applications, state expert appraisal committees (SEACs) consider 
applications,  which  the state environmental impact assessment authorities (SEIAAs) 
then approve or reje ct. The SEIAAs consist  of a chairperson, member and member 
secretary appointed by the state government and approved by MoEF CC. In some  cases,  
the member secretary of the State Pollution Control  Board (SPCB) may serve  as a 
member of the SEIAA. 
The 2006 EC reforms  also increased the stringency  of the EC process  by requiring that 
all Category  A and B mines  apply  for mine -specific  ToR before undertaking the EIA. 
Finally, all Category  A and B mines  are required to hold public  hearings  after completing 
the EIA and before submitting the application to the ministry  for clearance  consideration. 
Our analysis  focuses  on this requirement for public  hearings. In sum,  the reformed EC 
application  process  takes  the following five steps: 
1. A pplication to MoEFCC  or SEIAA: t he project proponent files an application 
consisting of basic  information about the project (Form 1), a pre-feasibility  report 
and proposed ToR for the EIA; 
2. Scoping for determination of ToR: the EAC or SEAC drafts  the ToR based on the 
project characteristics  and the proposed ToR, meeting to finalise the ToR; 
3. EIA study  and public  consultation: t he project proponent undertakes  the EIA and 
submits  a draft to the relevant SPCB, which  organi ses a public  hearing and 
invites  written comments  from the public ; 
4. Project a ppraisal  by EAC or SEAC: the project proponent files the final  EIA and 
environmental management plan to the MoEFCC  or SEIAA, and the EAC or 
SEAC consider the final  proposal  and make  a recommendation to the MoEFCC  
or SEIAA to grant or reject  the clearance; and  
5. Grant or reject EC: the MoEFCC  or SEIAA can grant or reject  the EC or request 
that the EAC or SEAC reconsider  its recommendation. The MoEFCC  or SEIAA 
makes  the final  decision.  
When the MoEFCC  or SEIAA grants  clearance, it assigns  cleared projects  a set of 
specific  and general  conditions  with which  they are legally  bound to comply . For 
                                                 
1 Initially, mines of less than 5 hectares, which comprised about 70 per cent of new mines 
between 1990 and 2013, were not subject to EC. In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that EC 
applied to all mines, and mines of area less than five hectares have since been required to seek 
approval through state -level processes. http://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/regulating-
smallscale -mines -below -5-ha-41892 . 6 example, the  conditions  for a limestone mine  cleared in Chhattisgarh in 2014 include 
monitoring of nearby  groundwater  levels  and planting of a green barrier around the 
mine’s periphery. After  clearance, project proponents  must  submit biannual  reports  
detailing compliance with these conditions  to the MoEFCC  or SEIAA. These reports  are 
available to the public  by request and should be posted online by either the MoEFCC  or 
SEIAA. To our knowledge, mines  are not required to hire external  contractors  to produce 
these compliance reports  and, in practice, many  mines  fail to submit compliance reports.  
Figure 1 summari ses the provisions  of the 2006 reforms  across  categories  of mines , by 
size and over time. As the figure indicates, the reforms  were  only partially  implemented 
during an interim  period immediately  following the September  2006 reform  notification.  
Please see Section 4 for more  details  on the timeline of the 2006 reforms. 7 Figure 1: Schematic summary  of regulatory  changes of the 2006 EC notification 
 
Note:  Although the interim period was mandated to end on 13 September 2007,  Category  B 
projects  continued to be processed  by the MoEFCC  at the central  level  until their corresponding 
state  clearance  bodies  (SEAC  and SEIAA)  had been  established.  Our sample includes  all 
Category  B projects  cleared  at the central  level before their state’s  SEAC  and SEIAA were 
established.  Regulatory changes of the 2006 EC notification
Mine 
area
5-25 ha
25-50 
ha
> 50 haPre-notification 
-Applicant completes EIA 
based on standardised 
ToR
-Applicant submits EIA to 
MoEFCC
-MoEFCC considers the 
application, consulting 
with experts if necessary, and grants or denies 
clearance
-Applicant completes EIA 
based on standardised 
ToR
-Applicant holds a 
public hearing
-Applicant submits EIA 
and public hearing 
records to MoEFCC
-MoEFCC considers the 
application, consulting 
with experts if necessary, and grants or denies clearance
-Applicant completes 
EIA based on standardised ToRs
-Applicant holds a 
public hearing
-Applicant submits EIA 
and public hearing 
records to MoEFCC
-MoEFCC considers the 
application, consulting 
with experts if necessary, and grants or denies clearanceInterim period: 
9/14/06-9/13/07*
Category B project:
-In absence of SEIAA 
and SEAC, cleared by 
central -level EAC and 
MoEFCC
-Broadly, MoEFCC has 
discretion in applying 
revised EIA rules 
-Applicant may receive 
mine-specific ToR from 
EAC
-Applicant completes 
draft EIA
-Applicant holds a 
public hearing
-EAC may consider the 
application and 
recommend it for clearance, deferral or 
rejection
-MoEFCC makes a final 
decision to grant or deny 
clearance
Category A project:
-May receive mine-
specific ToRs from EAC-Broadly, MoEFCC has 
discretion in extent to 
apply revised EIA rules 
-Applicant completes 
draft EIA-Applicant holds a 
public hearing
-EAC may consider the 
application and 
recommend it for clearance, deferral or rejection
-MoEFCC makes a final 
decision to grant or deny 
clearancePost-notification
Category B project:
-SEAC issues mine -
specific ToR-Applicant completes 
draft EIA 
-Applicant holds a 
public hearing 
-SEAC considers the 
application and 
recommends it for clearance, deferral or 
rejection
-SEIAA makes a final 
decision to grant or deny 
clearance
Category A project:
-EAC issues mine -
specific ToR-Applicant completes 
draft EIA 
-Applicant holds a 
public hearing 
-EAC considers the 
application and 
recommends it for clearance, deferral or 
rejection
-MoEFCC makes a final 
decision to grant or deny 
clearance8 2.2 Public hearings in the EC process 
We focus  our evaluation on one key aspect of the 2006 EC reforms: the expanded 
requirement that all mines  of area greater than five hectares  hold a public  hearing. 
During Step 3 of the clearance process  outlined above, the applicant is required to seek  
‘the concerns  of local affected persons  and others  who have a plausible  stake in the 
environmental  impacts  of the project or activity ’ (MoEFCC 2006). This public  consultation 
requirement is designed  to provide an official  channel  for the public  to have  input on the 
evaluation and mitigation of social  and environmental  risks associated with mines  before 
their development.  
Many  point to the public  hearing requirement as one of the most  central  aspects  of the 
2006 reforms , in that it opens  the only valve  for public participation in the regulation of a 
sector where public  and private interests  often do not align. Indeed, conflicts  between  
mining projects  and the local community  are common , and a common  cause  of delays  in 
development of projects  (Rights  and Resources 2016). Mohan and Pabreja (2016)  write  
that public  hearings  are the link between the EC process  and ‘democratic  participatory  
governance’, ‘ sustainable development’, and ‘ natural  justice’ for citizens.   
Mine  pr oponents  are required to consult with the public  via two channels: holding a 
public  hearing near the site of the mine  and eliciting written comments  from other 
stakeholders. The mine  proponent begins  the public  consultation process  by submitting a 
written request to the relevant SPCB to hold a public hearing.  Along with the request, 
they must  provide at least 10 hard copies  and electronic  copies  of the draft EIA report to 
the SPCB, with a summary  given both in English and in the local language. The mine  
proponent must  also forward copies  to the MoEFCC and to various  district-level  and 
regional  authorities. Each  of these authorities  must  make  the draft EIA public  until the 
public  hearing is finished. Similarly,  the MoEFCC  must  display  the summary  of the draft 
EIA on its website and have  a physical  copy of the full report available in its office in 
Delhi.  
Next, the SPCB  sets a date and venue for the public  hearing within seven  days  of 
receiving the project proponent’s request. The 2006 notification requires  that the hearing 
be held in ‘close  proximity  district-wise ’, but we are aware of no more  specific  regulations  
on the hearing location. The SPCB must  advertise the hearing date in one major national  
newspaper  and one regional  local-language paper , with at least  30 days ’ notice. The 
hearing itself must be overseen by the district magistrate, district collector or deputy 
commissioner, assisted by a representative of the SPCB. After  a representative for the 
project proponent describes  the project and the EIA report, anyone present may ask for 
clarification on the project and give opinions.  
The publ ic  hearing should cover the content of the EIA, which  must  include a description 
of the project size, location, and baseline environmental  characteristics ; anticipated 
environmental  impacts  and mitigation measures; and social  costs  and benefits, including 
any plans  for the relocation of villagers,  improvements  in physical  infrastructure, and 
local employment. 
The SPCB representative videotapes  the hearing and compiles  a written  summary  of its 
proceedings. After  reading this summary  aloud, the district magistrate signs  it and then 9 forwards  it to the relevant SPCB; the SPCB then passes  this summary  to MoEFCC  for 
consideration in the project’s clearance deliberation. This summary  must  be translated 
into English and the local vernacular  and must  be displayed by local authorities, district  
authorities  and the SPCB. T he hearing must  be completed within 45 days  of the project 
proponent’s initial  request. The mine  proponent must  address  all concerns  raised during 
the consultation process  in revising the draft EIA, and then submit  the final EIA report to 
the MoEFCC  for the clearance appraisal  process. 
In practice, anecdotal  evidence suggests  that public  hearings  have provided an imperfect 
channel  for consultation  in the clearance process. News  coverage suggests  that public  
hearings  are often held purely  as a formality, with little provision for meaningful  
engagement by the public  (Ghosh 2008) . In particular, project proponents  may hold the 
hearings  at inconvenient locations  or times, may neglect to provide the public  with the 
draft EIA before the hearing, or may fail to substantively  incorporate public  feedback  into 
the final EIA or project design (Mohan and Pabreja 2016) .  
In Jeet Singh  Kanwar v Union of India (2011), for example, villagers  sought to overturn 
clearance for a thermal  power  plant on the basis  that the project proponent had ‘ flouted’ 
the public  consultation requirement. The villagers  argued that the EIA summary  had 
been made available in English only 1 week  before the hearing (instead of in both 
English and the local vernacular  30 days  in advance), that the summary  of proceedings  
was not read out to the public  and that the hearing was held 8 kilometres  from the project 
site, precluding many  from attending.  
In Ad i vasi  Majdoor  Kisan Ekta Sangthan v MoEF  (2011), villagers  contested the EC of a 
coal mine  and washery  in Chhattisgarh on similar  grounds. Besides  arguing that the 
hearing was held in a remote and inconvenient location, the appellants  claimed that the 
mine  proponent failed to make  the summary  draft EIA available online or in person in the 
district official ’s office and failed to publici se any local-language version of the summary.  
Next, video recordings  showed that villagers  opposing the project disrupted t he 
proceedings  before leaving the premises. The district magistrate issued no notice that 
the public  hearing would continue, but resumed the hearing with only a few supporters  of 
the project present. The National  Green Tribunal ’s deliberations  remark that all of these 
supporters  ‘appeared to have been brought and prompted by the proponent’, concluding 
that the event had been ‘a mockery  of public  hearing’. The t ribunal overturned the mine ’s 
EC on these grounds.  
Project proponents ’ non-compliance with the public  hearing requirements  often translate 
into delays  later in the clearance process.  The Council  on Energy, Environment and 
Water, a think  tank in India, finds  that 9.17 per cent of projects  that were  delayed in EAC 
meetings  were  because  of issues related to public  hearings – especially  coal mining and 
industrial  projects. The delays  often arise because the proponent has not incorporated 
recommendations  from the public  hearing or because the SPCB has  created 
administrative delays  in conducting the hearings . The Council on Energy, Environment 
and Water also cautions  that public  hearings  tend to be held too late in the decision-
making process, so they simply  become a delay  for project proponents  and an 
opportunity  for public  opposition.  10 We focus  our analysis  on this public  hearing requirement, which, while  lauded in the 
literature as a crucial  part of EIA, has been contentious  in India’s  EC process.  
2.3 Theory  of change 
We hypothesi se that introducing a requirement that mines  hold public  hearings  before 
recei ving clearance could have improved environmental  performance at mines  by 
increasing the transparency  of the clearance process  and subjecting projects  to more  
stringent review  by expert committees  and the public. In the same  sense, this increased 
transparency could improve mines’  compliance with legal  requirements  of the EC 
process, like the requirement that mines  begin construction only after receiving 
clearance. The reforms  could have increased the regulatory  burden of the process  by 
placing additional  requirements  on mine  proponents  and lengthening the clearance 
process. Note  that all these mechanisms  depend on strong enforcement of the public  
hearing requirement, which is difficult to verify  and was unlikely  to be uniformly  true.  
We measure mines’  enviro nmental  performance as the change in air pollution, water 
pollution and vegetation coverage at mine  sites from two years  pre-clearance to two 
years  post-clearance. We measure clearance costs as mines’  self-reported total costs  
and as the duration of the clearance process. We describe each  of these outcome 
variables  in more  detail  in Section 5 and summari se our hypotheses  and outcome 
measures  in Table A1 in Appendix  A.  
Both pr ior to and following the 2006 reforms  to the EC process, the requirements  and 
procedures  to which  new mining project proponents  were  subject varied according to a 
series  of characteristics  of the mines  (such as  lease area)  and their locations  (such as  
whether  the project involve d forest clearing or was near a sensitive ecosystem). For 
instance, some  EC applicants  were  subject to a public  hearing requirement before and 
after the 2006 reforms, while  others  were  only subject to the requirement after the 
reforms , or not at all. Moreover , the implementation of the reforms was gradual  and, in 
some  cases, uneven. See Figure 1 for these implementation details. In this section, we 
abstract from these details  and identify  the potential  causal  channels  through which  the 
key elements  of the reforms may have  contributed to improved environmental  and s ocial 
outcomes  in the mining sector.  
Figure 2 illustrates  the theory  of change underlying the hypotheses  described above. 
The theory  of change gives  a series  of hypothesi sed causal  channels  through which  the 
public  hearing and related reforms  may have  resu lted in improved environmental  
outcomes  at mines. The nature of these causal  channels  – in particular, public  and 
expert committees ’ applying scrutiny  and firms ’ perceiving reputational  and legal  risks in 
failing to meet  expectations  and changing plans  and building  capacity  – make  testing 
these causal  channels  difficult, so we are largely  limited  to observing the final outcomes. 
However, we have collected several  intermediate process  outcomes, including the 
duration of consideration  by the expert committee for each EC application,  which  we 
interpret as a limited  measure of the scrutiny  applied to each application.  
In Fi gure 2, the policy  (mustard) initiates  a series  of newly  required actions  (light blue) by 
project proponents, regulators  and the EAC,  which  create hypothesi sed intermediate 11 (purple) and final (light green) outcomes. Here , we describe  each of the actions  and 
outcomes, along with the hypothesi sed causal  pathways  and assumptions . 
A1: The core objective of the 2006 reforms  was to require project p roponents  to collect  
and provide more  detailed and higher -quality  information about potential  risks associated 
with their proposed projects , in order that experts  and the public  could  more  thoroughly  
scrutini se projects  prior to their execution. Large mine s, for example, were  required to file 
more  detailed project specifications  at the beginning of the application stage, in order 
that the EAC could provide conditions  for the EIA. 
Intermediate Outcome 1: The process  of collecting additional  detailed information on 
project risks required by the reformed EC process  may have induced improvements  in 
planning, design and environmental  management at mines. The causal  channel  here can 
be distinguished from that described  in Intermediate Outcome 3, where mining project  
proponents  alter their designs, siting and production processes  in anticipation of or in 
response to scrutiny  from regulators, the EAC or the public. Unlike that kind of 
deterrence effect, this  intermediate outcome results  from improved capacity  at mine s and 
in mining firms  to evaluate and manage environmental  risks.  This intermediate outcome 
relies  on two assumptions : (i) that the information solicited under the reformed EC 
process  requires detailed study  of environmental  and social  risks by  firms  and 
investment of additional  resources  to do so; and  (ii) that the capacity  built during the EC 
stage was sustained during project execution. These assumptions  are difficult to verify  
systematically. 
A2:  At several  points  during the approval  process, the MoEF CC receives and files the 
documentation provided by project proponents  before it is formally  reviewed by the EAC. 
For smaller  projects  that go through state-level  EC, this review  and processing are 
carried out by officers  in state environmental  agencies, often the SPCB. This provides  
bureaucrats  with an opportunity  to call the project proponent ’s attention to elements  of 
their application that may preclude approval  by the EAC in advance of EAC hearings, or 
calls the EAC’s attention  to particular  aspects  of the project design that pose  
environmental  or social  risks.  
A3: Approximately  once each month, the EAC for non-coal  mining projects  meets  to 
consider filed applications  at two stages. First, the  EAC considers  applications  for ToR, 
which  specif y the detailed evaluation criteria that must  be considered in the project’s EIA. 
Second, the EAC considers  final applications, following the EIA and public  hearing. 
Representatives  from the project proponents  attend these meetings  to receive  feedback  
and answer  questions . At both stages, the EAC can request additional  information or 
alterations  to the project. The minutes  of these meetings  are publicly  available, and it is 
clear that they frequently exercised this opportunity  to delay  clearance in order  to seek  
additional  information or changes  to project designs  during the study  period. 
Intermediate O utcome 2: Scrutiny  from the ministry  and the EAC may have  led project 
proponents  to alter project designs. Here , we also consider the possibility  that project 
proponents  formed expectations  about the project characteristics  that led to delays  in EC 
and designed their projects  accordingly  to minimi se the probability  of delay. We have 
verified in the EAC meeting minutes  that resubmission of the EC documents  was 
common  at various  stages  of the process.  While we see evidence that the EAC 12 demanded additional  information and alteration of designs  and not just correction of 
clerical errors or missing  documentation, it is difficult to systematically  assess how 
substantive project revisions  were  in response to or in anticipation of this scrutiny.  
Related potential  outcomes  are avoidance or evasion: projects  may avoid going through 
the EC process  either by reducing the project size to less than five hectares  (a measure 
that would allow  projects  to avoid being subject to EC only until the Supreme Court 
applied EC to mines  of all sizes in  2012) or evade it by operating illegally.  Given  that 
scrutiny  in the process  is differentiated by evaluation of the risks posed by projects, we 
might expect  riskier projects  to avoid or evade EC.  
A4: Beginning in June 2014, application documents  were  made available  in real time on 
the website environmentclearance.nic.in. The site also provides a timeline enabling 
projects  and the public  to track  the progre ss of individual  applications.  During the months  
that followed, the MoEF CC added documentation for projects  cleared prior to 2014. This 
portal  provided the public  with a central  repository  of information about pending and 
cleared mining projects.  
A5: Following the completion of their EIA, project proponents  are required to hold a 
public  hearing in the district where the mine  will be established. Proponents  are required 
to advertise the public  hearing in local newspapers  and respond to public  comment.  
In termediate Outcome 3: Access to  additional  information about new and expansion 
mining projects  during the EC process  may have enabled greater scrutiny  by the public  
and the media. This outcome relies  on the assumption that the information was, in fact, 
publi cly accessible; for example, that documents  were  posted to the website promptly, 
that advertisements  of public  hearings  were  made  well in advance of hearings  in 
publications  that would reach the relevant populations, that public  hearings  were  held in 
locations  and at times  that enabled meaningful  engagement by affected populations,  and 
that the presentation of information was such  that the key issues  were  accessible  to 
these populations.  
The accessibility  of EC application  information has been called  into question, particularly  
prior to the launch of the ministry’s online clearance portal  (CEEW 2014). Anecdotal  
evidence suggests  that there is likely  substantial  regional  and project-to-project variation 
in the quality  and accessibility  of information made  available, although we are unable  to 
observe this systematically. If additional  public  scrutiny  of projects  was great enough, we 
expect that projects  might  have altered their designs  either in response or in anticipation; 
this is represented in the figure as an arrow pointing towards Intermediate Outcome 2.  
A6:  The EAC scrutini ses applications  one final time following completion of the EIA and 
public  hearing, but the minister of environment holds  final approval  authority. Again at 
this stage, scrutiny  may induce projects  to alter the project design, which  may require  
resubmission of documentation. Theoretically, projects  could be rejected, but in the 
application  data we collected a rejection occurred less than once for every  1,000 
applications.  
A7: Following receipt of EC, projects  are required to submit compliance self-reports  
twice  annually. Each project is cleared with a set of general  and specific  conditions, 
which  have legal  status. General  conditions  are applied to all mineral  mining projects, 13 while  spec ific conditions  are tailored by the EAC and the ministry  to the specific  risks 
posed by the project, as determined during the review  process. Compliance audits  may 
be conducted by MoEFCC field offices  or by the SPCBs, but in practice  these agencies  
lack the staff to carry out these inspections  on a regular  basis. The ministry and EAC 
often consider c ompliance performance in applications  for renewal  of EC or for 
expansion of existing projects.  
Final outcomes:  The objectives  of the reforms  were  to improve social  and 
environmental  outcomes  at and around mining sites. The EC process  may have 
increased the benefits  and reduced the costs  of mining activities  for surrounding 
communities. The benefits  may have included employment, direct financial  transfers,  
local tax revenue from economic  activity  and in-kind transfers  such as  community  
development program mes.  The costs may have included displacement of residents  – a 
common  practice for many  large mining  operations  – and environmental  health hazards. 
The health haza rds we consider  are air and water pollution.  14 Figure 2: Theory  of change, 2006 EC reform  
 
3. Context  
Before introducing our data and empirical  strategy  in more  detail , we place the mining 
sector into economic  and social  context in India. Mining comprises  only a modest share 
of India’s economic  activity, but the sector is large  by global  standards  and widespread 
across  the country. According to the United States  Geological  Survey,  India ranks  in the 
world ’s top six producers  of iron, pig iron, aluminium , bauxite,  zinc and coal.  In 2014, 
India’s mineral  mining sector comprised 8,355 mines , producing 54 types  of minerals.  
While  mineral  mining generates  only about 2.5 per cent of India’s annual  economic  
output, mining activity  is present throughout the country: 24 of 29 states  and about 45 
per cent of districts had active mining leases  in 2014. The median mine  was 4.75 
hectares , or about eight Olympic -sized  football  fields.  
2006 Environmental clearance 
reforms  
A1: Project proponents collect and 
provide additional information on 
project risks  
A2: Ministry facilitates 
review by EAC  
A4: Detailed information about the 
proposed project is made publicly 
availabl e online  
A3: EAC considers project 
proposal at both ToR and 
EC stages  
A5: Project conducts public hearing 
in the district where project is 
located  
Intermediate Outcome 2:  
Project proponents alter project 
design, siting, or production 
process  
Intermedia te Outcome 
3: Public pressure and 
reputational concerns  
A6: Final EC approval  
A7: Post-EC monitoring and 
enforcement  
Improved social and 
environmental outcomes  
Intermediate 
Outcome 1:  
Additional 
information on 
risks leads to 
better design 
and 
management by 
firms  
Resubmission  
15 The social  benefits  and costs  of mining and other extractive industries  are the focus  of a 
large literature in economics  on the resource curse. Much  of the resource  curse  literature 
focuses  on the macroeconomic  effects  of resource wealth, but a growing body  of work  
uses  local and regional  variation to study  microeconomic  impacts  as well. Aragón and 
Rud (2013)  find that the world's largest gold mine  in Peru increased income  and 
household consumption and reduced  poverty  in communities  near the mine. Asher a nd 
Novosad (2014)  study  mining booms  in India and find similar  spillover effects  on local 
economies. A variety  of evidence suggests  large  external  costs  from mining activities  as 
well. For instance, Aragón and Rud (2016)  find that air pollution from gold mining 
reduced agricultural  productivity  at nearby  farms  by up to 40 per cent in Ghana, and 
Berman and colleagues  (2017)  find a causal  link between mining and conflict in  Africa. 
As we describe in detail  in Section 5, we have compiled a broad repository  of data on 
non-coal  mines  granted central -level  EC in India between 2006 and 2016. These data do 
not include the full universe of mines  in India, since  we can only collect administrative 
data on mines  cleared at the central  level; our data therefore do not include small  mines  
cleared at the state level after the 2006 ref orms,  any illegal  mines  or any coal mines. In 
total, we collected MoEFCC  clearance records  for 1,318 non-coal  mines  cleared at the 
central  level since  2006;  of these, we can collect  a broad set of data on mine  and 
clearance application characteristics  for 934 mines. Our data repository  for this set of  
934 non-coal  mines  comprises  information on mine size and production capacity, mine  
parent companies, the clearance application process  and environmental  conditions  at 
mine  sites.2 We describe  the data collection process  in detail  in Section 5; here, we use 
this sample of central -level  mining clearance applications  to describe the landscape of 
mines  passing through the central -level  EC process  around the time of the 2006 reforms. 
We begin with some  simple  statistics on the clearance process  (Table 1). Consider  
clearance duration, which  we define as the time, in days , between the date of initial 
application  for EC and the date EC was granted in the form of a clearance letter. While 
the median project has an EC duration of about 255 days, the distribution is heavily  right-
skewed, with some  mines  enduring an EC process  that takes  almost 10 years. Next,  
40% of applications  in our sample are for new mines, while  12% are for renewal  of 
clearance for existing mines  with no area or capacity  enhancement and 48% are for 
production or capacity  enhancements  in existing mines. While about 74% of mines  in our 
sample are submitted by parent companies  with no previous  successful  clearances,  18% 
belong to companies  with between one and four previous  clearances  and 8% belong to 
companies  with at least five previous  clearances.  
Next, we  gi ve summary  statistics  on mines  themselves. In our sample, 87 per cent of 
mines  are non-riverbed mines  (including opencast and underground mines), while  14 per 
cent are riverbed mines. About 6 per cent of mines  in our sample are explicitly  identified 
as violation cases  in their clearance letters, meaning the mine  had previously  expanded 
production capacity  or begun operations  without receiving the required clearance. Next, 
                                                 
2 The sample with which we evaluate the impact of the 2006 public hearing requirement is a 
subset of this larger sample; that analysis relies only on mines of area less  than 50 hectares that 
applied for clearance before the corresponding state -level clearance bodies had been 
established.  16 we find that mine  area and production capacity  are heavily  right-skewed.  While  the 
median mine  has area of 91 hectares , mines’  areas  range from 3 hectares  to almost  
8,000 hectares . Similarly,  while  the median mine  has a production c apacity  of 0.3 million 
tonnes per annum  (MTPA), capacity  ranges  from 50 TPA to 20 MTPA.  
Table 1: Summary  statistics for all mines in clearance letter  data set 
Numerical  variables  Mean  Median  Std. dev. Min. Max.  Obs.  
EC duration  in days  360.43  254.5  357.98  21 3026  934 
Total  area of project  (ha) 265.84  90.83  536.01  3.04 7978.84  934 
Total  mine  production  capacity  
(MTPA)  1.381  0.30 2.589  0.001  19.6 934 
Year  of deforestation  – clearance  
year 0.491  0 2.298  –3 4 318 
Avg. PM (μg/m3) in clearance  
year 41.224  39 15.592  20 118 859 
Median  EVI in clearance  year 0.212  0.198  0.0858  0.045  0.527  844 
Biochemical  oxygen  demand  
(mg/L)  in clearance  year 2.542  1.7 2.915  0.3 23.4 528 
pH in clearance  year 7.687  7.8 0.493  6.2 9.15 524 
Δ avg. annual  PM 0.636  0 4.206  –18 17 676 
Δ median  annual  EVI –0.0153  –0.0099  0.0439  –0.230  0.143  667 
Δ avg. annual  biochemical  
oxygen demand  0.265  0.3 1.773  –7.5 8.3 281 
Δ avg. annual  pH –0.163  –0.05 0.443  –1.45 1.2 268 
       
Numerical  variables  Proportion  Obs.      
Cleared  before  No previous  
clearance 0.737  934     
 1–4 previous  
clearances  0.184       
  ≥ 5 previous  
clearances  0.079       
Application  
type New mine  0.398  934     
 Existing  mine  0.123       
  Area  or capacity  
enhancement  0.479       
Mine  type Non-riverbed  
mine  0.865  934     
 Riverbed  mine  0.135       
Violation  case  Violation  0.056  934     
 Non-violation  0.944       
Deforestation  
compliance  Complied  0.623  318     
Deforested  
illegally  0.377       
 
Mines  also diverge significantly  in environmental  outcomes, which  we first measure as 
conditions  in the year of clearance. There is substantial  variation in site levels at 
clearance. While  the median mine  site has average fine particulate matter (PM 2.5) 
concentrations  in the year of clearance of about 39 μg/m3, some  mines  have annual  
average PM concentrations  of up to 118 μg/m3. For reference, the World  Health 17 Organization places  its guidelines  for safe exposure to PM 2.5 at an annual  average of 
10 μg/m3. The median mine  in our sample has median annual  enhanced vegetation 
index (EVI) at clearance  of 0.198 on a scale  of 0 to 1, corresponding to relative 
barrenness. The median mine  has biochemical  oxygen  demand (BOD) of 1.7 mg/L in the 
nearest river, although some  mines  are near rivers with BOD  of 23.4 mg/L; BOD  
measures  the extent of organic  pollution in water.  The median mine  is a near a river with 
pH of 7.8, just above neutral. 
We now consider mines’  environmental  performance, which  we define as the change in 
conditions  from two years  pre-clearance to two years  post-clearance. At the median 
mine  site, PM 2.5 concentrations  stay constant, EVI falls slightly,  BOD  increases  and pH 
falls slightly  from two years  pre-clearance to two years  post-clearance. However, these 
trends  vary substantially  across  mines ; for example, average PM concentration 
increased by 17 μg/m3 around clearance in some  mines, while  falling by 18 μg/m3 in 
others. Finally, we see that mines’  compliance with the clearance process  is relatively  
low: although mines  are legally  required to deforest only after receiving clearance, about 
38 per cent of mines  deforested before the year of clearance. 
4. Timeline  
In this section,  we provide more  details  on the timing of the 2006 EC reforms. In January  
1994, MoEFCC  passed the EIA notification, based on Section  3 of the Environmental  
Protection Act of 1986. The 1994 statutory  requirements  for clearance, which  occurred 
only at the central  level, involved standard ToR and did not typically  invoke  an expert 
committee, remained in force until the EIA Notification of 14 September  2006. We 
describe the provisions  of this notification in detail  in Section 2. 
The 2006 clearance notification was not immediately  enforced. MoEFCC  issued a set of 
Interim  Operational  Guidelines  on 13 October 2006 that remained in effect until  13 
September  2007. These  interim  guidelines  allowed some  discretion in the evaluation of 
mining projects  applying for clearance between 14 September  2006 and 1 July  2007. 
During this period, new or pending applications  were  evaluated by the newly  formed  
EAC and, where considered necessary, asked to revise  their EIAs to bring them  in line 
with the tighter  standards  imposed by the 2006 notification. The provisions  of the 2006 
notification were  fully enforced for all projects  applying after 1 July  2007. 
Next, while  the notification decentrali sed the clearance process  for Category  B projects  
to the state level, to be overseen by newly  constituted SEIAAs and SEACs, most  states  
did not establish these bodies  for several  years  following t he notification. Table A2 in the 
Appendix  gives  the dates  on which  SEACs  were  established by state. As we describe in 
more  detail  in the following section, we evaluate the expansion of public  hearings  using a 
sample comprising mines  smaller  than 50 hectares  that were  cleared at the central  level 
because their corresponding SEIAA and SEAC had not yet been established.  
The potenti ally uneven implementation of clearance requirements  during this interim  
period makes  it challenging to rigorously  evaluate the impacts  of the 2006 EC reforms  
with an event-study  analysis. However, we have carefully  analysed clearance letters  for 
all mines  of area less than 50 hectares  that applied for clearance during the interim  18 period, and we find that the requirement that all mines  of area greater than 5 hectares  
hold a public  hearing was uniformly  enforced after the September  2006 notification.  
As we detail  in the next section, we focus  our empirical  analysis  on this requirement. 
Therefore, we identify  14 September  2006 as the breakpoint  between the old and 
reformed EC processes. See Figure 1 in Section  2 for a detailed description of the 
provisions  and timeline of the 2006 reforms.  
5. Evaluation  design , methods  and implementation  
5.1 Evaluating the 2006 EC reform:  exploiting a cut -off at 25 hectares 
As we have already  described, one crucial  provision of the 2006 EC reforms  was to 
expand the requirement that mines  hold public  hearings  from mines  of area greater than 
25 hectares to all Category  B mines, or those of area between 5 hectares and 50 
hectares . Under the 1994 clearance provisions, only mines of area greater than 25 
hectares  had been required to hold public  hearings. This policy  change was enforced on 
all project proposals  that applied for EC starting 14 Septembe r 2006. See Section 2 for 
more  detail  on these clear ance requirements  and Section 4 for details  on the timing of its 
implementation.  
We ex ploit the sharp cut-offs at mines  of 25 hectares and around the date of the EC 
notification in September  2006 to evaluate the impact of requiring mines  to hold a public  
hearing after completing their EIAs. In particular, we run a difference-in -difference 
regression comparing mines  of area less than and greater than 25 hectares  that applied 
before and after the 2006 reform  notification. Here, we define treatment to be mines  of 
area less than 25 hectares, which began holding public  hearings  only after the 2006 
notification, and the control  to be mines  of area greater than 25 hectares, which  were  
required to hold public  hearings  both before and after the notification.  
As the 2006  notification applies  identical  regulations  to all mines  with areas  of 5–50 
hectares  and bundles  them  into Category  B projects, we restrict our sample throughout 
this analysis  to mines  of area between 5 hectares  (below which  mines  are not required  to 
get clearance) and 50 hectares. For mines  just around the 25-hectare cut-off, the only 
differential  change in the EC process  around the date of the 2006 notification was the 
additional  requirement of a public  hearing for mines  under  25 hectares . Therefore, we 
can evaluate the impact of holding a public  hearing as the differential  change in 
outcomes  from pre-notification to post-notification between treatment (mines  of area less 
than 25 hectares ) and control  (mines  of area greater than 25 hectares , which  always  had 
to hold public  hearings).  
By nec essity, our sample for this analysis  is restricted to mines  from states  that had not 
yet set up state-level  clearance bodies; once these bodies  were  established, mines  of 
area less than 50 hectares  would be cleared at the state level and would disappear  from 
our sample. We will provide summary  statistics  for this sample  in more  detail  after 
describing our data collection process. 
Our identification strategy  is robust to any differences  between the treatment and control  
groups  that stay constant before and after the notification. However, our results  are 
vulnerable to any differential  changes  in the composition of treatment and control  from 19 the pre-reform  to post-reform  period. We can account for any differential  changes  in 
composition  along mines’ observable characteristics  by including those characteristics  as 
controls  in our difference -in-difference model. However, our results  would  still be 
vulnerable to any differential  changes  in unobservable characteristics  of mines , 
conditional  on these o bservables  between treatment and control. 
For example, selection on unobservable characteristics  could pose a substantial  threat  to 
our difference-in -difference model. After  the announcement of the 2006 notification, 
mines  could  have adjusted their areas based on their expectations  of treatment under  
the clearance process. There are three likely  forms  of selection in our sample. First, 
mines  might anticipate significant costs  from additional  regulatory  and public  scrutiny  
under  the 2006 reforms  and, therefore, might split into leases  of less than 5 hectares to 
escape the clearance process  as a whole; this form of selection could be stronger  for 
mines  that would otherwise be of area less than 25 hectares , both because avoidance 
might be less costly  and becaus e the addition of the public  hearing requirement would 
make  the 2006 reforms  differentially  more  costly  for mines  smaller than 25 hectares .  
Another selection mechanism  could  arise if mines  that would have reported area less 
than 25 hectares before the reform reported a larger area post-reform, since  the 
imposition of the public  hearing requirement removed the premium  to being smaller than 
25 hectares . Finally, since  the 2006 reforms  split mines  greater than 50 hectares into 
Category  A and less than 50 hectares  into Category  B, we might expect to see mines  
that would otherwise be larger than 50 hectares decreasing in size to avoid what could  
have been a more  costly  process  for Category  A mines.  
All thr ee of these mechanisms  would likely  tend to bias our estimates  for the impact of 
public  hearings  towards  zero. Take EC stringency, which  we measure by clearance 
duration and assume increases  with mines’  riskiness.  Consider the first scenario, where  
particularly  risky mines  select out of the clearance process  by getting below  5 hectares ; 
the loss of higher-risk mines  from the treatment group after the notification would mean 
average stringency  for treatment after the notification would fall, relative to a world  with 
no selection, reducing our estimates  for the impact of public  hearings  after controlling for 
area.  
Similarly,  consider the case  where particularly  risky treatment mines  increase in size to 
cross the 25-hectare threshold, since  there is less of a premium  to being smaller than 25 
hectares . Then, selecti on would bias the average control  stringency  upwards, relative to 
the treatment mean stringency  after the reform, biasing our estimates  for the impact of 
public  hearings  towards  zero.  
Finally, consider  the third form of selection, where  particularly  risky mines  greater than 
50 hectares  decrease in size to become  Category  B mines. Then, selection would bias 
the average control  stringency  upwards , biasing down our estimates  for the impact of 
public  hearings. In summary,  then, these forms  of selection could b ias down  our 
estimates  for the impacts  of public  hearings. It is reassuring that selection is unlikely  to 
bias our results  towards  finding false significant impacts  of public  hearings, but these 
mechanisms  could prevent us from picking up true, significant impacts.  20 We document evidence of selection in Section 6 , arguing that while  we see substantial  
evidence of mines  just above 5 hectares  splitting  into mines  of less than 5 hectares , 
therefore avoiding the clearance process  as a whole, we see less evidence of selection 
around the 25-hectare cut-off on which  we base our analysis. We take a series  of steps  
to help account for any selection, and document these robustness  checks  in Section 6.  
Broadly, we seek  to estimate the impact of the public  hearing requirement on the mine -
level costs  and benefits  of the EC process. First,  we measure the regulatory  burden of 
public  hearings  either as the duration of the clearance process,  defined as the time (in 
days) between application and clearance approval, or as mines ’ self-reported total costs.  
While  the benefits  of the clearance process  could include social  benefits , such as 
increased employment for local communities, we focus  on evaluating the impact of the 
reform  on environmental  performance at mines.  
We proxy  for environmental  conditions  for mines  with four outcomes: average annual  PM 
2.5 concentration within one k ilometre of mines ’ centroids, BOD  and pH in the nearest  
river, and median annual  vegetation coverage at mine  sites. For each of these 
environmental  outcomes,  we define our outcome variable for analysis  as the change in 
that outcome from two years  pre-clearance to two years  post-clearance. Evaluating the 
impact of public  hearings  on these differenced environmental  outcomes  allows  us to 
estimate the impact of public  hearings  on mines ’ environmental  performance, rather  than 
picking up changes  in mine  siting  over time.  
In addi tion to these first- differenced measures  of mines' environmental  performance, we 
assess the impact of public  hearings  on mines ’ compliance with the requirement that 
they deforest only after receiving clearance. We describe the measurement of each of 
these outcomes  in more  detail  below, and summari se our primary hypotheses  and 
outcomes  in Table A1 in Appendix  A. 
5.2 Data  collection  
Our analysis rests  on a unique data repository  that we have compiled on all mines  that 
applied for EC in India from 2006 to 2016. These data cover a range of aspects  of these 
mining projects, including characteristics  of mines  and project proponents, details  of the 
application  process  and satellite-based  measurement of environmental  outcomes  at 
mine  sites. Note that our difference-in -difference analysis  of the impacts  of public  
hearings  relies  on a small  subset  of this broader  data set, which  is limited  to mines  of 
area less than 50 hectares  that applied from states  that had not yet established a 
central -level  clearance body. See Section 5.3 for more  detail  on the sample on which  we 
base our analysis.  
Our full data set on mines  that applied for clearance between 2006 and 2016 comprises  
934 mines, while  the subset on which  we base our analysis  includes  134 mines. We 
present summary  statistics  for the full sample of 934 mines  in Table 1, with summary  
statistics  for our analysis  sub-sample in Table 5.  
5.2.1 M oEFCC  data on clearance applications 
We construct the backbone of this data set by  scraping clearance records  from an online 
application  database published by the MoEFCC. We have scraped data on the roughly  
15,000 EC applications  that have been filed since  the system’s initiation  in 1980. Of 21 these, we collected 1,318 records  for unique non-coal  mines  that applied for clearance 
between 2006 and 2016. In addition to reporting project name, project location and the 
dates  of key EC stages  of submission, review  and approval,  this online portal  hosts  
documents  associated with each EC application.  
Data available through the MoEFCC  portal  suffer  from several  limitations. First, dates  
associated with key steps  in the EC process  are not reported for many  projects , and 
many  associated documents  are missing. Even  where application dates  are reported, 
they are sometimes  inconsistent with the sequence of the legal  clearance process  or 
differ from those reported in EC documents  associated with the same  project.  
Based on these inaccuracies, we supplement the MoEFCC  portal  with data on mine  
characteristics  and application processes  drawn from the clearance letters  granted to 
these mining  projects. We have scraped all these letters  from attachments  available  on 
MoEFCC's online portal. While  the contents  of the clearance letters  change over time,  
the letters  typically  contain a range of information on the dates  of key steps  in the EC 
application  process, such as  the date the project applied for clearance or was granted 
ToR, and on physical  mine  characteristics  such as  the mineral  mined, mine  lease area, 
production capacity  and method of extraction.  
The c learance letters  are available either as PDF files with text embedding, PDF files 
without text embedding or html files. We first convert all of these files to text files and 
then programmatically  extract a wide set of variables, including key dates  in the 
application  process  such as the date of EC application and clearance; the state, district, 
tehsil  and village in which  a mine  is located; and a range of mine  characteristics, such as 
the mine  proponent, minerals  mined, mine  production capacity, mine  area and whether  
an application is for a mine  expansion or a new  mine.  
To ensure the accuracy  of the clearance letter  data set, we  supplement this 
programmatic  variable extraction with  manual  data entry. Together  with the MoEFCC  
application  data set, this  clearance letter data set provides  a robust set of information on 
mine  characteristics  and EC applications  for all mines  in our sample. O ur final data set 
includes  934 mining applications  for EC with full information for mine  and clearance 
characteristics  scraped from the MoEFCC  website.  
5.2.2 Complementary information from  the Indian Bureau of Mines 
Although our clearance data set gives  comprehensive data on the EC application 
timeline by project, it does  not give dates  of actual  mine  operations. To fill this gap, we 
purchased a data set – the All India Directory  of Mining Leases  – from the Indian Bureau 
of Mines. These data describe details  on all mining leases  (more than 9, 200) issued  
since  1992 (Table 2 lists the variables  provided), including the date of mine  execution. 
We hired a data team  from the Jameel  Abdul  Latif Poverty  Action Lab to digitise these 
data, which  we initially  received as 2,000 hard copy  pages. We have merged these data 
with the clearance data set, by mine , wherever  possible.  
Table 2:  Variables included in the Indian Bureau of Mines directory  
Date  lease  was granted  Duration  of lease  Date  lease  was executed  
Date  lease  will expire  Area  of lease  Lease  number  
Category  (A or B) Primary  mineral  Other  minerals  22 5.2.3 Satellite data on environmental outcomes 
Next, we  link this data set on mines ’ EC applications  and mine  characteristics  with a 
novel  data set of satellite-based environmental  outcomes  at mine  locations. We 
commissioned mines ’ global positioning system locations  from ML Infomap, an Indian 
company. Using these coordinates, we link mines  to satellite -based measures  of air 
pollution, land cover and water quality. In particular, we use air pollution  satellite  data 
assembled by a group at Dalhousie University, which  measure fine particulate matter  
concentration (in micrograms  per metres cubed)  at a spatial  resolution of one kilometre 
for the years  1998 to 2014. We use average annual  PM concentration in the one-
kilometre cell in which  a mine  is located as a measure of ambient air quality  at mine 
sites. We are able to link 889 of the 934 mines  for which  we have full clearance records 
with data on PM concentrations  in the year of clearance.  
Next, we  assess  deforestation at mine  sites using  the EVI from NASA ’s MODIS  satellite 
(Didan 2015) . EVI measures  vegetation for the entire globe at a spatial  resolution of 250 
metres . Values  range from 0 to 1, where any value less than 0.2 corresponds  to land that 
is considered to be sparse to barren. EVI values  are calculated at 16-day  intervals  from 
daily MODIS  data. Using  these satellite data, we calculate the annual  maximum,  median 
and mean EVI at mine  sites as a measure of the extent of deforestation at mine sites. 
We are able to link 882 of the 934 mines  in our clearance sample  with data on vegetation 
coverage around the year of clearance.  
We al so use this MODIS  EVI data to determine the date of deforestation for each mine, 
which  we identify  as the year of a structural  break  in mine -level  timeseries  for median 
EVI. We restrict this structural  break  to occur  within  four years  before or after the date of 
clearance, which  we have scraped from MoEFCC  clearance  records. We record a non-
missing year of deforestation only in cases  where a Supremum  Wald  test of the 
proposed structural  break  is significant at the 10 per cent level. Of the 934 mines  for 
which  we have full clearance records, we determine deforestation year, or a statistically  
significant structural  break  in median EVI, for 324 mining projects.  
Finally, we complete this data set on environmental  outcomes  at mines  with data on 
water quality  near mines , drawn from the Central  Pollution Control  Board’s ENVIS 
database, which  includes  water quality  monitoring data from stations  across India. We 
define water quality  at mines  as water quality  at the nearest site monitor, and we proxy  
for water quality  with BOD,  a measure of organic  pollution, and pH. Greenstone and 
Hanna (2014)  rely on BOD  as one of several  key measure s of water pollution in India. Of 
the 934 mines  in our sample  with full clearance  records, we have data on nearby  BOD  
for 538 mines and data on nearby  pH for 534 mines.  
One pr imary  concern in our use of water quality  data is that the nearest water monitor 
may be a substantial  distance from the mines  and may capture water pollutants  from 
other upstream  mines. Although this measurement error could bias our estimates  for the 
impact of public  hearings  towards  zero, we see little cause  to suspect differential  
measurement error between treatment and control. 23 5.3 Validation of outcome measures 
Next, we  validate some  of the key environmental  outcomes  that we will use to assess  the 
impact of the 2006 EC reforms. In particular, we present results  from analysis  of 
outcome variables  for air pollution and land use change in order to validate that these 
measures  can capture meaningful  impacts  of mining activity. 
Figure 3 shows event study evidence demonstrating the magnitude of land clearance 
that occurs at mining sites following clearance. The plot represents time, in years, relative to the year mines obtained clearance on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis 
presents the mean deviation across mines in the annual median EVI in a 250-metre 
radius of the mining site from the level in the year of clearance (event year 0). Ninety-five 
per cent confidence intervals are shown, based on standard errors clustered by mine.  
The figure shows a clear and dramatic drop in vegetation following clearance. The 
smaller downward trend in years before clearance suggests that in some cases, land 
clearing occurs before EC is obtained, which is a focus of firm responses to the 
lengthening of the EC process following the 2006 reforms in the next section.  
Figure 3: Event study , median annual EVI at mining site (250 m radius), mines 
obtaining clearance between  2006  and 2015 
 
Table 3 presents  report results  from regressions  of statistics  of mines ’ distribution of 16-
day EVI on an indicator variable for years  post clearance. The specification is 
(1
)  𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 =𝛽𝛽0+  𝛽𝛽1𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃  𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 +  𝛾𝛾𝑖𝑖 +  𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖 +  𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 
w
here γt and σi are year of clearance and mine  fixed effects,  respectively. Maxi mum EVI, 
shown in column 2, falls by about 14.5 per cent on the mean in the years  following 
clearance, holding fixed all time-invariant conditions  of mines  and common  yearly  shocks 
to EVI. The result is highly  significant, with a t-statistic  of more  than 2 4. 
Event  years (Year  of observation  – Year  of clearance ) 
EVI at mining s ite 
 95% CI  
Median annual EVI  24 Table 3: Change in median, maximum  and minimum annual EVI, mines obtaining 
clearance between  2006 and 2015, mine and year of clearance fixed effects 
 Median  Maximum  Minimum  
 (1) (2) (3) 
Post clearance  (= 1) –0.0206***  –0.0768** * –0.0144***  
 (0.00144)  (0.00319)  (0.000962)  
Fixed  effects  Mine  and year Mine  and year Mine  and year 
Observations  15,810 15,810 15,810 
Mines  (clusters)  930 930 930 
Mean  of EVI 0.209  0.466  0.122  
R2 0.860  0.608  0.723  
Adjusted  R2 0.851  0.583  0.705  
Note: Standard errors clustered by mine; * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.  
Figure 4 presents  similar  results  for annual  PM  2.5 concentrations  at mining sites. Rather 
than using the raw PM  2.5 level observed at the mining site, the figure shows  the 
difference in PM concentrations  between that in a one-kilometre radius  of the mine  and 
then in the surrounding area, between 1 and 50 kilometres  from the mine.  Here , the 
effect of mining activity  on PM is much  less discernible than for EVI. However,  beginning 
two years  before clearance, there is a modest upward trend in PM, relative to that in the 
surrounding area. 
Figure 4: Event study , difference between annual PM 2.5 concentrations (μg/m3) at 
mine site (1 km radius) and surrounding area (50 km radius), opencast  mines 
cleared 2006– 2015 
 
Table 4 presents  these results  in a regression that estimates  the specification in equation 
1, above, with various  measures  of PM on the left-hand side. In Column 3, which  
corresponds  to the radii used in the figure, pollution rises by only one-tenth of a percent 
of the mean and is only marginally  significant. As in Table 3, these results  will understate 
the effect of mining on PM if activity  occurred before clearance and increased PM.  
Event  years (Year  of observation  – Year  of clearance ) 
 
PM2.5 at mining site – PM2.5 in 50 km radius  
 
95% CI 
Mean annual PM2.5  (μg/m3) 25 Table 4: Difference between annual PM 2.5 concentrations (μg/m3) at mining site 
(inner  radius) and surrounding area (outer  radius), opencast  mines obtaining 
clearance between  2006 and 2015, mine and year of clearance fixed effects 
 1 km inner r adius  
25 km outer 
radius  5 km inner radius  
25 km outer 
radius  1 km inner radius  
50 km outer 
radius  5 km inner radius  
50 km outer 
radius  
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Post clearance  
(=1) 0.0283  0.0218  0.0402*  0.0331  
 (0.0180)  (0.0158)  (0.0237)  (0.0224)  
Fixed  effects  Mine  and year Mine  and year Mine  and year Mine  and year 
Observation s 13,374 13,374 13,374 13,374 
Mines  
(clusters)  743 743 743 743 
Mean  of PM 
(μg/m3) 37.50  37.50  37.50  37.50  
R2 0.435  0.470  0.588  0.615  
Adjusted  R2 0.401  0.438  0.563  0.592  
Note: Standard errors clustered by mine; * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.  
5.4 Analysis sample and power  
Although our full sample  includes  934 mines  that a pplied for clearance between 2006 
and 2016, our identification strategy  restricts  us to estimating  the impact of the 2006 
reform  from a much  smaller  sample of mines. Again, we evaluate the impact of requiring 
mines  to hold public  hearings  by estimating a d ifference-in -difference specification 
around the date of the 2006 reform  for mines  greater than and less than 25 hectares . 
Thus, we restrict our analysis  to mines  between 5 hectares ( below  which  mines  are not 
required to apply  for clearance) and 50 hectares. Again, all these mines  are subject to 
the same  clearance requirements  as Category  B mines  under  the reformed EC process.   
Next, we  restrict our sample to mines  that applied  for clearance before their state 
established a state-level  clearance body, the SEAC.  After  each state establishes its 
SEAC, Category  B mines  no longer  apply to the central  MoEFCC  and thus do not appear  
in our sample, which  is based on the MoEFCC  application database. In other  words, the 
upper  time limit on application date for inclusion in our sample varies  by state. While  
most  states  had established their clearance body  by the end of 2008, Goa established its 
body  in 2010, Jharkhand in 2011, Orissa  in 2012  and Uttarakhand in 2013 (Table A2 in 
the Appendix) .  
In our s ample, 120 of 134 mines  had applied for clearance by the end of 2008. Only nine 
mines  in our sample applied for clearance in 2009 and five in 2010. In total, our 
evaluation sample comprises  134 mines, of which  68 are treatment (area less than 25 
hectares ) and 66 are control  (area greater than 25 hectares ). We present summary  
statistics  on mine  characteristics  for this sample in Table 5. We have tried our analysis  
excluding these 14 observations  and find that doing so does  not alter our null results  for 
the impact of public  hearings.  
Although we have no scope to expand this sample, since  we are limited  by secondary  
data availability  and the restrictions  of our empirical  strategy,  this sample  may offer 26 limited  power  to estimate the impacts  of the 2006 reform. If holding a publi c hearing 
reduced clearance duration by 20 per cent, a sample  of 134 would provide power  of only 
about 33 per cent. See Figure B1 in Appendix  B for our calculated power  at a range of 
sample sizes.3 Thus, our fairly  small  sample may prevent us from detecting even 
economically  significant impacts  of requiring mines  to hold a public  hearing. 
6. Impact  analysis  and results of  the key evaluation  questions  
6.1 Descriptive evidence on the 2006 reforms:  selection 
We begin our analysis  of the 2006 reforms  with simpl e descriptive analysis  of mine  
application  trends. Although we cannot provide a robust analysis  of the impacts  of the 
2006 reforms  as a whole, visible selection in mine  application trends  suggests  that mine  
proponents  perceived the reforms  to be substantial and costly.  We argue that we see 
most  evidence of relatively  small  treatment mines  (between 5 and 15 hectares ) selecting 
out of the clearance process  as a whole, rather than of selection between treatment and 
control  around the 25-hectare public  hearing cut-off. 
Consider  Figure 5, which  uses  data from the Indian Bureau of Mines’  Registry  of Mining 
Leases  to plot the number of mining leases  granted in each year, from 1990 to 2013, by 
lease area, for six groups: less than 5 hectares  (dark  circles ), 5–15 hectares  (dark  
squares ), 15–25 hectares  (x marks ), 25–35 hectares  (open circles ), 35–50 hectares  
(open squares ) and greater than 50 hectares  (small  light circles ).  
The fi gure illustrates  that the EC reforms  initiated  in September  2006 appear  to have had 
a large, immediate and permanent effect on the size of new mines  established. In 
particular, there appears  to be a large  increase in applications  for leases  of area less 
than 5 h ectares – which  were  not subject to EC until a 2012 Supreme Court ruling – 
between 2005 and 2007. Over  the same  years, there was a marked drop in the number 
of leases  granted to mines  with areas between 5 and 15 hectares . We see no visible 
change in application trends  for any categories  of mines  with area greater than 15 
hectares . 
                                                 
3 We calculate power via simulation. We expand our sample by three times, then take 1,000 
random draws of treatment and control observations to fill various sample sizes. We run our 
primary difference- in-difference regression on each of these 1,000 random samples, per sample 
size, to estimate power for a given sample size.  27 Figure  5: New mining leases granted by lease  area, 1990– 2013 
These trends  are strongly  consistent with one of the selection  stories  we have outlined 
above, namely  that mining firms  anticipated significant costs from additional  regulatory 
and public  scrutiny  under  the 2006 reforms  and therefore split mines  just above the 5-
hectare cut-off into mines  of area below  that cut-off to avoid a more  stringent clearance 
process. Indeed, the number of leases  granted for mines between 5 and 15 hectares  fell 
by 73 between 2006 and 2007, while  the number of leases  granted for 5 hectares  or less 
rose by 242; these figures  would be consistent with mines  of around 15 hectares  splitting 
into about three 5-hectare mines. These results  provide strong evidence that mine  
proponents  saw the 2006 reforms  as costly.  
On the other hand, Figure 5 does  not suggest any visible selection between area 
categories  for mines  of area between 15 and 25 hectares  or for those greater than 25 
hectares ; leases  granted stay broadly  steady  for these groups  around the date of the 
2006 notification. These  results  suggest there is limited  selection for mines  near the 25-
hectare cut- off: we  neither see that mines  below  25 hectares grew larger  and crossed  
the 25 hectares threshold, nor that mines  between 15 and 25 hectares or above 25 
hectares split into mines  less than 5 hectares .  
We also do not  see visible evidence of selection on time, with  mines  seeking to get 
clearance before the 2006 reforms  were  announced. We are aware of no evidence that 
mines  knew  about the reform before it happened,  and the figure shows  no visible  breaks  
from generally  increasing application trends  over time until 2006. Note, also, that we see 
little visible  evidence of spatial  selection among mines  after the 2 006 reform . Figure F1 
in online Appendix  F maps  active mining leases  across  districts  using  Indian Bureau of 
Mines  data; the spatial  pattern remains  similar  between 2006 and 2013.  
Mining  leases  granted  
Year  
0-5 ha 
25-35 ha  
5-15 ha  
35-50 ha  
15-25 ha  
50+ ha  28 So far, we have looked for selection in the Indian Bureau of Mines’  lease  directory, which  
covers  all mining leases  granted in India. We now evaluate the prevalence of selection in 
our sample. Figure 6 plots  a histogram  of clearance applications ’ mine  areas before and 
after the 2006 notification. Several  trends  appear . First, there appears  to be a substantial  
decrease in mass  at low areas  and a substantial  increase in mass  at high areas  after the 
2006 reforms. These shifts  are consistent with two selection stories, namely  that small  
mines  would select less than 5 hectares to escap e the clearance process  as a whole and 
mines  above 50 hectares might select  less than that cut-off to attempt to move  into the 
state-level  clearance process.   
Figure 6: Distribution of  mine areas in our  sample 
 
There is also some  evidence of selection about the 25-hectare cut-off, which  we do not 
see in the Indian Bureau of Mines data and which  could pose a threat to our 
identification. In particular, we see some  slight bunching just below  the 25-hectare cut-off 
before the 2006 ref orms;  this bunching appears  to be reduced after the 2006 reform, 
which  would be consistent with mines  no longer  selecting  to be less than  25 hectares 
once the expansion of the public  hearing removes  the associated premium. However,  it 
is important to keep in mind  that this apparent bunching is based on only a handful  of 
mines  in our sample. In particular, only about two additional  mines  in our sample fall just 
below  the 25-hectare cut-off in our data before the notification than after the notification. 
Rather, the primary visible changes  in the distribution is the major increase in mass  
between around 35 and 50 hectares . As we proceed with our difference-in -difference 
analysis  of the impacts  of public  hearings, we recogni se that selection may compromise  
our results. We seek  to account for this selection  as much  as possible.  
6.2 Impacts of the 2006 EC reform  
As we describe in Section 5, our primary empirical  analysis  exploits  a discontinuity  in the 
historical  clearance process  for mines  of area above and below 25 hectares to evaluate 
the impact of requiring mines  to hold a public  hearing after compiling the EIA and before 
submitting that EIA to the MoEFCC  for clearance. Under  the 1994 system  for EC, mines  
Total mine area (ha)  
Number of mines  
 
Post-notif. 
Pre-notif 29 of area less than 25 hectares were  not required to hold public  hearings, while  those 
greater than 25 hectares were. The 2006 reforms  bundled all mines  of area between 5 
and 50 hectares as  Category  B projects, requiring all of them  to hold public  hearings  
after compiling an EIA. For mines  above and below  the 25-hectare cut-off, this 
differential  change in the public  hearing requirement was the only regulatory  change to 
the EC process  around the date of the 2006 notification. We exploit these cut-offs  in 
clearance requirements  at 25 hectares and around the date of the EC notification  in 
September  2006 to evaluate the impact of the public  hearing requirement.  
Identifying mines  of area less than 25 hectares as  treatment mines  and mines  of area 
greater  than 25 hectares as  control, we estimate the following differenc e-in-difference  
regression:  
(2
) 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 =  𝛽𝛽0 +  𝛽𝛽1𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽2𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽3𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃∗𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽4𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖+ 
𝛽𝛽5𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶ℎ𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑀𝑀𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽6𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝐶𝐶𝑄𝑄𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 ℎ𝑖𝑖 +𝛽𝛽7𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶  𝑏𝑏 𝐶𝐶𝑏𝑏 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 +  𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖 
w
here Yi is a mine -level  outcome, Treatment i is an indicator specifying that mine  i has 
area less than 25 hectares  and Post i indicates  that a given mine applied for clearance  
after the 2006 EC notification. Then, 𝛽𝛽1estimates  the differential  in mine  outcomes  for 
mines  less than 25 hectares relative to mines  greater than 25 hectares before the 2006 
notification, 𝛽𝛽2 estimates  the gap in mine  outcomes  for control  mines  (area greater than 
25 hectares ) that applied  after the 2006 notification, relative to those that applied before, 
and 𝛽𝛽3 estimates  the differential  change in mine  outcomes  around the date of the 2006 
notification for treatment mines  (area less than 25 hectares ). We can interpret 𝛽𝛽3 as the 
impact of the expanded public  hearing requirement under  the 2006 EC reforms.  
Note that  we restrict our analysis  to mines  of area between 5 and 50 hectares . Mines  of 
area below  5 hectares are not required to apply  for EC, and mines  of area greater  than 
50 hectares are classified  as Category  A projects  and subject  to a different clearance 
process.  
Besides  modelling mines’  clearance  outcomes  as a function of treatment status  and 
application  date, we include controls  for mine  characteristics, the number of applications  
awaiting clearance (queue length)  and parent company  characteristics. We include those 
characteristics  that previous  analysis  has shown are significant determinants  of EC 
stringency  and mines’  environmental  risks (Table C1 in Appendix  C presents simple  
regressions  of clearance  duration and environmental  conditions  on mine  characteristics) .  
We define queue length as the number of non-coal  mining projects  that submitted EC 
application s before project i and have not yet been granted clearance. Queue length is 
the same  for all projects  that applied for clearance at the same  time as project i. When  
the clearance system  is burdened with a larger  volume of clearances  to process,  we 
would expect each clearance to be processed more  slowly.   
Here, mine characteristics  represents  the characteristics  of project i that define its 
environmental  and social  risks.  In particular, it includes  log area, log production capacity, 
a categorical  variable indicating whether an application is for lease renewal, an area or 
capacity  enhancement or a new mine, and an indicator that a mine  is a riverbed mine.  
Finally, cleared before is a dummy  taking the value of 1 if the parent company  of project i 30 has already  had a successful  EC prior to submitting the application for clearance of 
project i. We hypothesi se that companies  with a successful  previous  clearance are 
‘known’ in the EC system  and might  be processed more  quickly.  
The validity  of our difference-in -difference analysis  rests  on the fulfilment of the parallel  
trends  assumption, which  requires  that the difference between the treatment and control  
groups  would stay constant over time in the absence of treatment – the imposition of the 
public  hearing requirement for the treatment group. We seek  to validate this assumption 
by visuali sing the trends  in mines’  outcomes  by treatment and control  groups  over time.  
We pre sent these figures  in online  Appendix  A (Figures A 1 to A8). Here, we plot trends  
in moving averages  by month, calculated as the average of two months  before to two 
months  after a given month. The trends  appear  to be largely  parallel  before the 2006 
notification, except for the year of deforestation relative to clearance, the probability  of 
compliance with the deforestation requirements  and BOD  in the nearest river. All these 
outcomes  have a relatively  high proportion of missing data, so their timeseries  are highly  
irregular.  
Even  if we s ee parallel  trends  in mine  outcomes  before the date of the 2006 reform, the 
reforms  themselves  could induce violations  of the parallel  trends  assumption. In 
particular, although our difference-in -difference analysis  is robust to any differences  
between the treatment and control  groups  that stay constant before and after the 
notification, it is vulnerable to any differential  changes  in composition for treatment and 
control . As we document in sections 5 and 6.1, the 2006 reforms could have induced 
substantial  selection between treatment and control. This selection could lead to 
compositional  changes  in treatment and control , on both observable and unobservable 
mine  characteristics. Table 5 assesses the extent of differential  compositional  changes  
on key mine  characteristics .  
We regress  each mine  characteristic  Yi on a simple  difference-in -difference specification, 
as follows:  
(3
) 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖=  α +  𝛽𝛽1𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽2𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽3𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃∗𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖+𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖 
The
 coefficient 𝛽𝛽3evaluates  differential  compositional  changes  on a given characteristic. 
Table 5 reports  pre-reform means  for treatment and control, as well as coefficients  𝛽𝛽1, 𝛽𝛽2 
and 𝛽𝛽3. We give p-values  for each of these coefficients  in parentheses. We find evidence 
of differential  compositional  changes  for application type, with a higher  proportion of 
treatment mines  applying as new mines , and a lower proportion of treatment mines  
applying for area or capacity  enhancements , after the 2006 reforms. We also find 
evidence of differential  changes  on date of application, with treatment mines  differentially  
applying for clearance later after the 2006 reforms.  
We attem pt to control  for these compositional  changes  as much  as possible by including 
controls  for observable mine  characteristics  in our regressions. Even  as we control  for 
selection  and other differential  compositional  changes on observable characteristics, 
however, our results  may still be vulnerable to selection on unobservable characteristics. 
We discuss  this selection  in more  detail  in Section 6.3. For now,  we proceed under  the 
assumption that the parallel  trends  assumption holds  and our difference -in-difference 
model  is valid.  31 Table 5: Assessing compositional changes on observable mine characteristics 
 Pre-reform  means  Difference -in-difference  estimates  
(p-values  below)  
 Control  Treatment  Treatmen t Post Post*treatment  
Queue  length  161.125  155.564  –5.561  15.635  –17.854  
   (0.669)  (0.216)  (0.282)  
Application  type       
New mine  0.375  0.154  –0.221  –0.015  0.344  
   (0.108)  (0.910)  (0.050)  
Existing  mine  0.188  0.103  –0.085  –0.047  0.152  
   (0.428)  (0.646)  (0.266)  
Area/ Capacity 
enhancement  0.438  0.744  0.306  0.062  –0.496  
   (0.034)  (0.652)  (0.007)  
      
Log prod cap (MTPA)  0.218  0.216  –0.002  0.108  –0.207  
   (0.983)  (0.272)  (0.112)  
Riverbed  mine  –0.000  0.026  0.026  0.020  0.023  
   (0.615)  (0.685)  (0.719)  
Mine  in multiple  districts  0.000  –0.000  –0.000  0.020  –0.020  
   (1.000)  (0.424)  (0.543)  
Proponent  cleared  before  0.250  0.077  –0.173  0.050  0.114  
   (0.155)  (0.670)  (0.458)  
Violation  0.000  0.026  0.026  –0.000  0.009  
   (0.481)  (1.000)  (0.848)  
Date  of EC application  2006 -05-31 2006 -04-25 –36.402  467.328  319.193  
   (0.669)  (0.000)  (0.004)  
Note:  Robust  standard errors  are given in parentheses.  Significan ce coefficients  are denoted with 
stars  as follows:  *** p < 0.01,  ** p < 0.05 and * p < 0.1. The s ample  is restricted  to mines  of area 
less than 50 hectares . Post notif. is a dummy  variable  indicating  that a mine  applied for clearance  
after the date of the EC notification on 14 September 2006.  Treatment  is a dummy  variable 
indicating that a mine  has area less than  25 hectares . Columns  1 and 2 give the control  and 
treatment  pre-reform  means.  For each  mine  characteristic  Yi, we run the following  regression:  Yi = 
β1Treatment  + β2Post + β3Treatment  * Post.  Column  3 gives  β1, column  4 gives  β2 and column  5 
gives  β3. P-values  are given  in parentheses  below  these  coefficients.  
We now turn to estimating the impact of the public  hearing requirement. We start by 
visuali sing our difference -in-difference regressions. Figures  B1 through B6 in online 
Appendix  B plot the kernel  densities  for each of these outcome variables  in our treatment 
and control  samples  separately  for the pre- and post-notification periods.  Each figure  is 
overlaid with vertical  lines for treatment and control  means  for each outcome. Visually,  
we can interpret the differential  change in these outcome distributions  for treatment and 
control  around the date of the notification as the impact of the change in public hearing 
requirements  for treatment mines. In many  cases,  there appears  to be a differential  pre-
post change  between treatment and control; this differential  shift is readily  visible  for PM 
concentrations  at clearance in Figure A13, for example.  
Tables  6, 7 and 8 present the results  of our primary difference-in -difference analysis  of 
the impact of public  hearings, which  we estimate as the differential  impact of the 2006  
reforms  for treatment mines  (area less than 25 hectares ) relative to control  mines  (area 
greater  than 25 hectares ). In Table 6, we begin by estimating the impact of the public  32 hearing requirement on the costs  of the EC process. We measure costs as duration of 
the EC process  (columns  1 and 2) or as the total mine  cost stated in each mine ’s 
clearance letter  (columns  3 and 4). First, we  find that clearance duration  fell significantly  
for mines  that applied for clearance after the 2006 notification, falling by about 31 per 
cent. Note that we can only interpret this average change as a time trend, not as a 
causal  impact  of the 2006 notification reforms. We find no significant  differential  pre-post 
trend for treatment mines ; in other words, there was no impact from the public  hearing 
requirement.  
Table 6: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform  on clearance costs 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
 Log duration  Total  mine  costs  
Treatment  –0.134  –0.203  52.208  17.132  
 (0.17)  (0.17)  (71.18)  (65.37)  
Post-notif.  –0.414***  –0.373***  90.286  78.854  
 (0.15)  (0.14)  (68.63)  (63.92)  
Treatment  * post-notif.  0.177  0.266  –104.800  –98.435  
 (0.21)  (0.20)  (80.53)  (73.22)  
Log area  –0.102  –0.016  42.537  –20.646  
 (0.13)  (0.13)  (34.83)  (33.97)  
     
Queue  length    0.002   –0.495  
  (0.00)   (0.38)  
Log prod cap (TPA)   –0.122***   52.730***  
  (0.03)   (10.61)  
     
Application  type (base = new mine)      
Existing  mine    0.211   40.281  
  (0.17)   (62.18)  
Area/ Capacity enhancement   0.261**   1.269  
  (0.13)   (41.16)  
     
Mine  type (riverbed = 1)  0.576   –70.783  
  (0.37)   (89.47)  
Letter  lists more  than 1 district   0.565***   –
101.260***  
  (0.12)   (37.88)  
Cleared  before    –0.211   –4.291  
  (0.14)   (53.91)  
Violation    0.240   182.082***  
  (0.16)   (40.49)  
Nr. observations   134 134 124 124 
R2  0.077  0.325  0.049  0.277  
Adj. R2  0.049  0.258  0.017  0.199  
Note: Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Significan ce coefficients are denoted with 
stars as follows: *** p  < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 and * p < 0.1. The sample is restricted to mines of area 
less than 50 hectares . Post- notif. is a dummy variable indicating that a mine applied for clearance 
after the date of the EC notification on 14 September 2006. Treatment is a dummy variable 
indicating that a mine has area less than  25 hectares . 33 It is important to approach these null results  with caution, since  they could simply  reflect 
weaknesses  in our measures  of process  costs. First, our measure of EC application 
duration does  not actually  include the time spent on the public  hearing. Most  mine  
applications  lack data on the date projects  first applied for the ToR, so we calculate 
duration as the time between when a project submits  its EIA to the MoEFCC  and the 
date on which  it receives  clearance.  The public  hearing occurs  before the project 
proponent submits  its EIA to the ministry, so  it is not included  in our m easure of duration. 
Thus, even if the public  hearing requirement increased the total duration  of the 
application  process, we might not expect to see significant impacts  on the measure of 
duration to which  we have access.   
However, this measure of duration could  pick up increases  in duration that arise because 
the public  hearing produces  additional  information that slows  consideration by the EAC, 
for example.  We attempt to rectify  this mismeasurement by running our primary 
regression on ToR duration, measured from the date of ToR submission to the date of 
clearance. However, ToR application dates are available for only 26 mines, only one of 
which  applied for clearance before the 2006 reforms, making this analysis  impossible.  
Instead, we s eek to evaluate the costs  of the clearance process  as mines’  total costs, 
which  they self-report in the EIA and which  are included in mine  clearance letters. 
Columns  3 and 4 of Table 6 present the results  of our primary difference-in -difference 
specification  of mine  costs. Ag ain, we estimate no significant impact of the public  hearing 
requirement on mines’  total costs.  Here, our predictive power  may be limited by 
imprecise outcome data. Mines  self-report costs,  which  are often rounded up to values  
such as  five crore rupees  (50 million  rupees ). Downward  bias due to measurement error 
may therefore contribute  to our null result for the impact of public  hearings. 
Next, we  consider the impact of the expanded public  hearing requirement on the benefits  
of the EC proces s, which  we proxy with mine s’ environmental  performance. Broadly, we 
find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement significantly  altered mines ’ 
environmental  performance. First, consider  the extent of vegetation coverage at mines , 
given in Table 7 . In particular, we evaluate the impact of the hearings  on the pre- to post-
clearance change in EVI, a satellite- based measure of the extent of vegetation coverage, 
the timing of deforestation relative to clearance and compliance with the requirement that 
mines  deforest the mine  site only after receiving clearance. We find no evidence that the 
public  hearing requirement significantly  changed mine s’ pre- to post-clearance EVI 
trends, nor do we find any significant change in these trends  for control  mines  that 
applied for clearance after the 2006 reform . 
  34 Table 7: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform on deforestation at mines 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
 Δ median EVI  Deforest year (rel. to 
clear)  Prob. of compliance  
Treatment  0.002  0.004  0.004  –0.342  0.173  –0.207  –0.099  
 (0.02)  (0.02)  (0.02)  (1.09)  (1.00)  (0.15)  (0.16)  
Post-notif.  –0.004  –0.001  0.000  –1.782***  –1.338**  –0.283***  –0.190*  
 (0.02)  (0.02)  (0.02)  (0.59)  (0.65)  (0.09)  (0.11)  
Treatment * post -notif.  0.016  0.013  0.012  1.195  0.174  0.260 0.075  
 (0.02)  (0.02)  (0.02)  (1.15)  (1.24)  (0.19)  (0.20)  
        
Log area  –0.002  –0.000  0.001  1.782*  2.297***  0.304*  0.366**  
 (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.93)  (0.82)  (0.16)  (0.15)  
Log prod cap (TPA)   –0.002  –0.002   –0.822***   –0.117***  
  (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.19)   (0.03)  
        
Application type (base = new 
mine)        
Existing mine   0.001  –0.003   –0.454   0.040  
  (0.01)  (0.01)   (1.01)   (0.17)  
Area/Capacity 
enhancement   0.000  –0.000   –0.361   –0.019  
  (0.01)  (0.01)   (0.65)   (0.14)  
        
Mine type (riverbed = 
1)   –0.010  –0.008   –2.632***   –0.754***  
  (0.01)  (0.02)   (0.55)   (0.22)  
Cleared before   –0.002  –0.003   0.586   0.229  
  (0.01)  (0.01)   (0.49)   (0.14)  
Queue length    –0.000   0.003   –0.001  
   (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.00)  
Letter lists more than 
1 district    0.004   1.191**   0.182  
   (0.01)   (0.58)   (0.14)  
Violation    0.044**   4.241***   0.548***  
   (0.02)   (0.59)   (0.11)  
Nr. observations  116 116 116 70 70 70 70 
R2 0.031  0.041  0.067  0.132  0.406  0.147  0.350  
Adj. R2  –0.004  –0.040  –0.042  0.079  0.280  0.095  0.213  
Note: Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. Significance coefficients are denoted with 
stars as follows: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 and * p < 0.1. The sample is restricted to mines of area 
less than 50 hectares. Post- notif. is a dummy variable indicating that a mine applied for clearance 
after the date of the EC notification on 14 September 2006. Treatment is a dummy variable 
indicating that a mine has area less than 25 hectares.  
Now consider proponents’ compliance with the requirement that they deforest the mine 
site only after receiving clearance, given in columns 4 through 7 in Table 7. Although we 
do not find any significant impact of the public hearing requirement on mines’ 
deforestation compliance, we find that mines that applied for clearance after the 2006 
notification were, in general, less likely to comply. In particular, we find that mines that 
applied for clearance after the 2006 reforms deforested an average of about 1.3 years 35 earlier, relative to clearance, and were therefore 19 percentage points more likely to 
illegally deforest before the year of clearance. This shift – which we cannot interpret 
causally – is somewhat surprising, given that the clearance process appears to have 
sped up following the 2006 notification. Although we find this overall time trend, we find 
no evidence that the expanded public hearing requirement significantly altered mines’ 
probability of deforesting early. 
Finally, we find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement significantly  altered air or 
water pollution at mine  sites. See Table 8, where we present estimates  for the impact of 
hearings  on changes  in PM concentrations  in columns  1 and 2, on changes  in BOD  in 
nearby  rivers  in columns  3 and 4, and on changes  in pH in nearby  rivers in columns  5 
and 6. We do find some  limited  evidence that mines ’ water pollution changed post 
notification: BOD  in rivers  near mines  increases  significantly  less around the date of 
clearance for mines  that applied after the 2006 notification, suggesting the reforms  could 
have reduced water pollution from mines. In particular, we find that BOD  in the nearest 
river increased by 1.255 mg/L less amongst  mines  that applied for clearance after the 
2006 notification, relative to a mean post-clearance increase of 0.604 mg/L amongst  pre-
reform  mines.  However, we cannot confidently  interpret this change as a causal  impact  
of the 2006 notification.  
We find no parallel  changes  in mines ’ impact on air pollution or pH in nearby  rivers. 
Furthermore, we find no evidence that the expanded public  hearing requirement for 
treatment mines  significantly  altered mines ’ air and water pollution. That is, treatment 
status  does  not significantly  alter the pre- to post-notification time trend for any of our 
measures  of air or water pollution.  
  36 Table 8: Impacts of the 2006 public hearing reform on air and water pollution at 
mines 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
 Δ PM (μg/m3) Δ BOD (mg/L)  Δ pH  
Treatment  0.014  –0.357  –0.262  0.631  0.477  0.444  –0.014  –0.014  –0.013 
 (1.32)  (1.27)  (1.27)  (0.54)  (0.66)  (0.66)  (0.11)  (0.13)  (0.13)  
Post-notif.  –1.400  –1.034  –1.056  –1.281**  –1.410**  –1.255**  0.026  0.036  0.018  
 (0.89)  (0.87)  (0.84)  (0.56)  (0.62)  (0.61)  (0.11)  (0.11)  (0.12)  
Treatment * 
post-notif.  0.620  0.827  0.851  0.112  0.179  0.165  –0.089  –0.094  –0.090  
 (1.25)  (1.25)  (1.24)  (0.63)  (0.65)  (0.65)  (0.15)  (0.16)  (0.16)  
          
Log area  1.120  1.438*  1.485*  0.165  0.061  0.058  –0.119  –0.083  –0.084  
 (0.85)  (0.86)  (0.88)  (0.35)  (0.44)  (0.45)  (0.09)  (0.09)  (0.10)  
Log prod cap 
(TPA)   –0.403**  –0.448**   0.114  0.112   –0.031*  –0.030*  
  (0.18)  (0.19)   (0.12)  (0.12)   (0.02)  (0.02)  
          
Application type 
(base = new 
mine)           
Existing mine   0.009  0.111   0.655  0.655   –0.006  –0.005  
  (0.78)  (0.82)   (0.42)  (0.41)   (0.12)  (0.12)  
Area/Capacity 
enhancement   0.586  0.648   –0.102  –0.053   0.025  0.019  
  (0.63)  (0.63)   (0.41)  (0.40)   (0.09)  (0.10)  
          
Mine type 
(riverbed = 1)   1.364  1.332   –0.198  –0.186   –0.002  –0.002  
  (3.91)  (4.12)   (0.31)  (0.31)   (0.05)  (0.05 ) 
Cleared before   –1.666***  –1.405*   –0.248  –0.262   –0.053  –0.051  
  (0.63)  (0.72)   (0.41)  (0.41)   (0.10)  (0.11)  
Queue length    0.010    –0.004    0.000  
   (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.00)  
Letter lists more 
than 1 district    –4.952***    0.000    0.000  
   (0.78)    (.)   (.) 
Violation    0.697    0.000    0.000  
   (1.15)    (.)   (.) 
Nr. observations  132 132 132 80 80 80 72 72 72 
R2  0.032  0.132  0.158  0.187  0.208  0.211  0.034  0.076  0.077  
Adj. R2  0.001  0.068  0.073  0.144  0.107  0.097  –0.023  –0.058  –0.074  
Note: Rob ust standard errors are given in parentheses. Significance coefficients are denoted with 
stars as follows: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05 and * p < 0.1. The sample is restricted to mines of area 
less than 50 hectares. Post- notif. is a dummy variable indicating that a mine applied for clearance 
after the date of the EC notification on 14 September 2006. Treatment is a dummy variable 
indicating that a mine has area less than 25 hectares.  
6.3 Robustness checks and extensions  
Next, we  provide robustness  checks  to help account for any bias induced by selection 
into treatment or control.  While  our difference-in -difference analysis  is robust to any 
differences  between the treatment and control  groups  that stay constant before and after 
the notification, it is vulnerable to any differential  changes  in composition  for treatment 
and control, as we describe in Section 5 .1. Selection into treatment or control  could 
create such  differential  changes. As we document in Section  6.1, we see evidence of 37 substantial  selection on mine size around the 5-hectare cut- off for  clearance. In 
particular, it appears  that mines  that would otherwise have areas between 5 and 15 
hectares split into mines  of area below  5 hectares to avoid a more  costly  clearance 
process. We see less evidence of selection of mines  around the 25-hectare cut-off, 
although we cannot rule out that this form of selection exists  as well. 
We account for compositional  changes  induced by selection on observable mine  
characteristics, such as  area, production capacity  and application type, by including 
those characteristics  as regression controls. However, our specification remains  
vulnerable to any differential  compositional  changes  on unobservable characteristics  
between treatment and control  conditional  on these observables. For example, we might 
find that particularly  risky mines  with areas of 8 hectares are more  likely  than less risky 
mines  of the same  size to select out of the clearance process  by splitting into two 4-
hectare mines. To minimi se any bias from selection about the 5-hectare clearance cut-
off, therefore, we can show  some  robustness  of our results  to selection by estimating our 
primary specification on a sample of mines  with area between 15 and 35 hectares and 
between 10 and 40 hectares , rather than between 5 and 50 hectares . We present these 
results  in tables E1 through E3 in online Appendix E.  
In gener al, we do not find that restricting our sample  to a smaller  area ranges  alters  our 
null results  for the impacts  of the expanded public  hearing requirement. The o nly 
exception is our estimate for the impact of public  hearings  on total mine  costs, which  
becomes  large and statistically  significant on a sample between 10 and 40 hectares ; we 
take this result  to be an aberration and not a robust indication of a treatment effect. 
Next, we  experiment with alternative specifications. Although  the 2006 reforms’ primary 
differential  change for mines  greater than and less than 25 hectares was the expansion 
of the public  hearing requirement, we might expect that other components of the 2006 
reform  would imply  differential  increases  in stringency  for larger  mines. For example, the 
2006 reforms  also began requiring mines  to apply  for mine -specific  ToR for the EIA. If 
mine -specific  ToR imposed differential  increases  in stringency  for larger  mines, we might 
expect to see both a level change for treatment mines , relative to control , and a change 
in the slope on our area control  in the post-notification period.  
We would expect any such  change in slope to bias upward our estimate for the average 
gap between mines  greater than and less than 25 hectares . First, we  have  made a set of 
scatterplots  with lines of best fit, visualis ing the relationship  between mine  area and mine  
outcomes  before and after the notification. These scatterplots, g iven in figures C1 to C7 
in online Appendix  C, show  some  slight changes  in slope for certain outcomes. We next 
test for  any such  change in regressions, running  the following variant of our primary 
difference-in -difference specification:  
(4) 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 =  𝛽𝛽0 +  𝛽𝛽1𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽2𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽3𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃∗𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽4𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖 
 +𝛽𝛽5𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃∗𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 𝐿𝐿 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
+  𝛽𝛽6𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶ℎ𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑀𝑀𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +  𝛽𝛽7𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝐶𝐶𝑄𝑄𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐿𝐿 𝑃𝑃ℎ𝑖𝑖 +𝛽𝛽8𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶  𝑏𝑏 𝐶𝐶𝑏𝑏 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 +  𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖  
W
e find that allowing an interaction between log area and the post-notification dummy  
does  not change our null results  for a level change associated with public  hearings. We 
present these results  in Tables  D1 through D4 in online Appendix  D.  38 We then test whether  any other mine  characteristics  have a substantially  different impact 
on post-reform EC stringency  by regressing clearance duration on a specification 
including a post interaction for each mine  characteristic  that we include in our primary 
regressions.  We present  these results  in Table E1 in online Appendix  E. We find that the 
relationship between EC stringency  and a number of application characteristics  changed 
significantly  post-reform. We find, for example, that while  riverbed mines  had significantly  
shorter durations  than non-riverbed mines  pre-reform, they had significantly  longer  
duration post-reform. Violation mines, on the other hand, had significantly  longer  
durations  pre-reform, but shorter  durations  post-reform. Our estimate for the impact of 
public  hearings  on duration falls in magnitude when we include these interactions  
between mine  characteristics  and the post-notification dummy,  remaining statistically  
insignificant.  
Finally, we corroborate our null results  for the impact of public  hearings  on vegetation 
cover at mine  sites by trying the same  analysis  for other measures  of landcover  drawn 
from the MODIS  satellite  (Friedl 2010) . Using  these data, we calculate the change in the 
percentage of land within a 500-m etre radius  of a mine  site that is natural, cropland, 
barren and a mixture from two years  before clearance to two years  after clearance. 
Table G1 in online Appendix  G presents  the results  of running our primary difference-in -
difference specification, using these measures  as outcome variables. As with EVI, we 
find no evidence that the public  hearing requirement significantly  altered the distribution 
of land types  at mine  sites.   
7. Discussion  
In this paper, we have pursued two objectives. First, we  have  provided proof of concept 
for the use of remote-sensing data to monitor mines’  environmental  compliance. We 
have matched a broad set of publicly  available administrative data on mines’  clearance 
applications  with remote sensing data on air pollution and vegetation to demonstrate how 
these free, publicly  available data can supplement monitoring in a low-resource 
environment  such as  India. Using  these data, we measure mines’  environmental  
performance as the change in environmental  conditions  from two years  pre-clearance to 
two years  post-clearance. One particular  innovation we have demonstrated is to identify  
the timing of deforestation at individual  mines  using structural  breaks  in time series  of 
vegetation coverage. This tool allows  us to assess compliance with the requirement that 
mines  break  ground only after receiving clearance.  
We have used our broad data repository  to evaluate the impacts  of a set of substantial  
reforms  to the EC process  enacted in 2006. These reforms  sought to bri ng greater  
transparency  and accountability  to the EC process  by subjecting larger  projects  to 
additional  scrutiny  from regulators, independent experts  and the public. We provide 
descriptive evidence of the impacts  of the overall  reforms: first, we  find that mine  
proponents  appear  to have shifted to smaller mine  sizes  to avoid a costly  reform ; and 
second, we find that mines  that applied for clearance after the reform  experienced 
substantially  shorter clearance but were  more  likely  to deforest illegally  before receiving 
clearance.  
Next, we  h ave  used a historical  discontinuity  in clearance requirements  to evaluate one 
crucial  aspect  of reform  – an expanded requirement that mines  hold a public  hearing 39 before applying for clearance. We evaluate the impact of embedding public  hearings  in 
the EC process  by exploiting a discontinuity  in the historical  clearance process  for mines  
with areas of 25 hectares . Overall, we find no evidence to suggest that public  hearings  
significantly  altered either the costs  of the clearance  process, as measured by mine  
costs  and the duration of the process, or its benefits, which  we measure as the impacts  
of mines  on air pollution,  water pollution and forest cover.  
We must  maintain a certain degree of caution in interpreting these resul ts. As we note 
earlier, for example, our measures  of clearance costs  may be imprecise: mine  capital  
costs  are imprecisely  estimated, and our measure of duration  does  not include the public  
hearing. This imprecision may somewhat compromise the internal  validity of our results; 
that is, it may obscure true impacts  of the public  hearing reform. We cannot assess  the 
full range of benefits  that we might expect to arise  from the public  hearing requirement. 
While  we can assess  its impact on environmental  outcomes, we might expect forced 
public  consultation to increase mines ’ other benefits  to nearby  communities, for example 
by increasing local employment or investments  in local schools  or health  centres .  
The external  validity  of our analysis  may be limited, in that our estimates  only apply  to 
the short-term  impacts  of the expansion of public  hearings  under the 2006 reform. We 
are limited  to analysing these impacts  for mines  that applied for clearance before state-
level clearance bodies  were  established, so we are u nable to estimate any impacts  of 
the reform  on mines  that applied for clearance in the longer term  after the reforms  took 
effect.  
Finally, our results  likely  have limited  external  validity  to public  hearing reforms in other 
contexts. The impacts  of any policy  reform  depend crucially  on the details  of its 
implementation. For a public  hearing reform, these important details  could  include , for 
example, the method of advertising hearings  to the public, how public  comments  are 
incorporated  into project plans  and people’s  expectations  of the regulation’s  stringency. 
Our estimates  for the impacts  of India’s  2006 EC reform  likely  would have only limited  
relevance to a similar  reform undertaken elsewhere, where the details  of implementation 
might differ in key ways.  
8. Specific findings  for policy  and practice  
While  inconclusive, our results  point  to a broad set of policy  recommendations  for 
regulators  of mining in India and beyond. Our null results  for the impact of public  
hearings  reaffirm  that ensuring new policie s work  as intended requires  not only 
establishing them, but also implementing them  well. In India, anecdotal  evidence 
suggests  that the public  hearings  may be ineffectual  tools  for public  consultation, 
because they are often inaccessible to affected populations  and are held as mere  
formalities. Enforcing particular details  – such as  advertising the hearings  well in 
advance, holding the hearings  at convenient locations  and times  and making  information 
on environmental  risks clear and accessible – may be cruc ial to ensuring  effective public  
engagement in the clearance process.  
Since 2006,  India’s  central  government has made a series  of reforms  to the public  
hearing regulations  to address  some  of these alleged shortcomings. For example, a 
2009 amendment to the EIA notification instituted  a requirement that the SPCB also 40 notify  the public  in areas  where newspapers  are not available by beating drums  and 
announcing the hearing by radio and television (Ghosh 2013). In addition, SPCBs often 
held multiple public  hearings  at the same  place and on the same  day; the MoEFCC  
issued a memorandum  in 2009 directing that public  hearings  be held at the same  
location only if there is sufficient time between the hearings  (Ghosh 2013). Although 
these reforms  could help to make  public  hearings  productive settings  for public  
engagement, ensuring they fulfil this potential  will require monitoring to ensure public  
hearings  are implemented systematically.  
Other analysts  have issued recommendations  for more  sweeping changes  to the role of 
public  hearings. For example, the Council  on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW 
2014)  recommends  that ensuring effective public  participation in India’s  EC process  
could require holding two public  hearings, first during the process  of determining 
appropriate ToR and then again after the EIA report is prepared. They  also argue that 
the public  hearings  should involve  a non-governmental organisation or  other civil society  
representation to ensure  the hearings  are accessible.  
Indeed, ensuring that public  hearings  are run in an accessible manner will likely  require 
improving monitoring and increasing  the costs  of non-compliance with procedural  
statutes. As we have seen, the National  Green Tribunal  occasionally  overturns  
clearances  on the basis  of non-compliant public  hearings. However, it is likely  that many  
purely  symbolic  public  hearings  go undetected. The notes  from consideration of mining  
projects  at EAC meetings  suggest that compliance with the public  hearing requirement is 
only cursorily verified during the clearance deliberation process;  in particular, the notes  
typically  state only, ‘The issues  raised  during Public  Hearing were  discussed during the 
meeting’. 
In s ome  cases, the EAC appears  to have given the public  hearing more  detailed scrutiny. 
For example, the meeting notes  for 15–16 January  2015 detail  that participants  in one 
mine’s  public  hearing commented on the ‘effect on  the agricultural  land due to mining 
activity, accidents  due to transpor tation of mineral, effect on children’ and other risks;  the 
EAC concluded that the mine  proponent should submit a revised plan to better 
accommodate these concerns. Strengthening mechanisms  like these to hold mine  
proponents  accountable  for public  hearing results  may be a crucial  part of ensuring they 
provide a venue for substantive public  engagement.  
Next, our analysis  has revealed the value of using  low-cost  tools  such as  remote-sensing 
data to monitor compliance. India’s  regulatory  environment has relatively  low capacity  for 
site monitoring; our analysis  has revealed that there is high non-compliance with 
clearance regulations. We find that a remarkable 38 per cent of mines  appear  to have 
illegally  deforested at the mine  site before the year of clearance. Amongst  the sample of 
mines  of 50 hectares or less, on which  we base our difference -in-difference analysis  of 
public  hearings, we find that non-compliance actually  became more  common  among  
mines  that applied for clearance after the 2006 reforms.  
Besides  thi s  form of illegal mining within the clearance process , there is likely  substantial  
illegal  mining  that never  passes  through the clearance process.  In a low-capacity  
environment  such as  India, satellite monitoring may provide  a useful  complement to 
traditional, higher-cost  forms  of monitoring. In particular, our work  has provided proof of 41 concept for the use of satellite data to measure air and water pollution and to identify  the 
timing of deforestation. In the EC process, this form of monitoring could provide useful  
inputs  into clearance deliberations  and post-clearance monitoring. 
Finally, our data collection process  has pointed to the importance of better synthesi sing 
publicly  available data on mines. In the Indian government, the Indian Bureau of Mines  
and MoEFCC  both regulate mining and publish records  on mining leases  and clearance 
applications,  respectively, but their records are unlinked. Establishing a central  mining 
database that linked mines  in the Indian Bureau of Mines’  and MoEFCC’s  systems  would 
enable more  meaningful  public  scrutiny  of mines  throughout their lifetimes, from  EC and 
lease application to mine  closure.  
Besides  these recommendations  for policymakers, our research process  points to a set 
of important learnings  for other researchers. Like policymakers, researchers  can benefit 
from using low-cost  satellite data to measure outcome variables. Our research is the 
most  recent contribution to a growing body  of work  in economics  that uses  remote 
sensing data to measure a range of environmental  and economic  outcome variables. 
These data allow  for novel  analysis  in that they are low-cost,  cover a wide geographic  
scale  and are available at unusually  granular  spatial  resolution (Donaldson and 
Storeygard 2016).  
Besides  poi nting to the value of using satellite data, our research process  reveals  the 
challenges  of working with policymakers  in real-world  environments. We pursued a 
number of intervention partnerships  with pollution and mining regulators  in India, none of 
which  came  to fruition. Our experience reveals  the importance of preparing contingency  
plans  for the obstacles  that inevitably  arise in real-world  research.  
 42 Appendixes  
Appendix A: Research hypotheses, variables and date SEAC was established in each state  
Table A 1: Research hypotheses, outcomes, variable construction 
Hypothesis  Outcome  Measurement  Variable construction  
The public hearing 
requirement could 
improve mines’ 
environmental 
performance by 
subjecting projects to more stringent 
review by expert 
committees and the public.  Δ average annual 
PM 2.5 
concentrations at 
mine sites  We use PM 2.5 data assembled by the Atmospheric 
Composition Analysis Group at Dalhousie University. The data 
are given in micrograms per metres cubed at a spatial 
resolution of one km for the years 1998 –2014. We measure 
ambient PM 2.5 concentrations at mine sites as average annual PM concentration in the one km cell in which a mine is located.  We define our variable as the change in 
average annual PM 2.5 concentrations 
from two  years before clearance to two 
years after clearance.  
Δ annual average 
biochemical 
oxygen demand 
(BOD) in nearest 
river We use BOD data, measured in mg/L, drawn from India’s 
Central Pollution Control Board’s ENVIS database. BOD is a 
measure of organic pollution. We measure a mine’s water 
pollution as average annual BOD at the nearest water monitor.  We define our BOD variable as the change 
in average annual BOD from two years 
before clearance to two years after 
clearance.  
Δ annual average 
pH in nearest river  We use pH data drawn from India’s Central Pollutio n Control 
Board’s ENVIS database. We measure a mine’s water alkalinity as average annual pH at the nearest water monitor.  We define our pH variable as the change in 
average annual pH from two years before 
clearance to two years after clearance.  
Δ annual  median 
enhanced 
vegetation index 
(EVI) at mine sites  We draw data for EVI, which measures vegetation coverage at 
a spatial resolution of 250 m, from NASA’s MODIS satellite. 
Values range from 0–1, where any value less than 0.2 
corresponds to land considered to be sparse or barren. We 
measure vegetation coverage at mines as annual median EVI.  We define our vegetation coverage variable 
as the change in annual median EVI from two years before clearance to two years 
after clearance.  
Increased public 
scrutiny  could also 
improve mines’ compliance with legal requirements 
of the EC process.  Year of 
deforestation relative to year of 
clearance We identify the year of deforestation as the year of a structural 
break in mine -level timeseries for annual median EVI. We 
restrict this structural break to occur within four years before or 
after the date of clearance. We record a non- missing year of 
deforestation only in cases where a supremum Wald test of the 
proposed structural break is significant at the 10 per cent  level.  We define our variable as the year of 
deforestation minus the year of clearance. Then, non -negative values proxy for 
compliance with the requirement that mines 
begin construction only after receiving 
clearance.  43 Hypothesis  Outcome  Measurement  Variable construction  
Indicator for 
compliance with 
deforestation 
requirement  We define this variable based on the previous outcome, the 
difference between year of deforestation and year of clearance. We code non -negative values for deforestation year as 
compliance with the deforestation requirement.   
But by increas ing 
public scrutiny of mining EC 
applications, the 
public hearing 
requirement could increase the costs 
of clearance for 
mines.  Duration of the 
clearance process  We calculate duration of the clearance process as the time in 
days between the date an applicant submitted a final EIA to the 
MoEFCC for consideration by the EAC and MoEFCC and the 
date the clearance letter was issued. We calculate this duration 
based on dates manually extracted from clearance letters.  This duration measure is not ideal for 
measuring the impact of public hearings, since it does not include the public hearing. 
So, while it could capture heightened 
scrutiny by the EAC or MoEFCC due to 
additional information gathered in the public hearing, it does not capture time 
spent on the public hearing itself.  
Mines’ total costs  We manually extract data on mine cost from clearance letters.  This data is fully self -reported and seems 
often to be reported with a high degree of 
rounding and estimation.  44 Table A 2: Date  each state’s SEAC e stablished 
State  name  Date  SEAC  was established  
Andhra  Pradesh   7/4/07  
Arun achal Pradesh   3/27/08  
Assam   5/1/13  
Bihar   2/7/11  
Chhattisgarh   1/9/08  
Goa 4/15/10  
Gujarat    6/12/07  
Haryana   4/21/08  
Himachal  Pradesh   10/11/07  
Jammu  & Kashmir    1/8/08  
Jharkhand   2/7/11  
Karnataka   6/11/07  
Kerala   11/3/11  
Madhya  Pradesh    1/8/08  
Maharashtra    4/21/07  
Manipur   11/3/11  
Meghalaya   7/23/07  
Orissa   8/17/12  
Punjab   11/19/07  
Rajasthan   7/30/08  
Sikkim    7/8/08  
Tamil  Nadu   3/3/08  
Telan gana   4/27/15  
Uttar  Pradesh    7/12/07  
Uttarakhand   3/8/13   
West  Bengal   4/13/07  
  45 Appendix B: Power  calculations 
Figure B1: Calculated power  assuming treatment effect on duration of 20 per cent  
 
Note: The vertical red line indicates  our true sample size of 134. 
 
  
Sample  size 
Power assuming public hearing inc reases   
duration by 20% 46 Appendix C: Regressions of EC duration and environmental  performance 
on mine characteristics 
Table C 1: Regressions of EC duration and environmental performance on mine 
characteristics 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
 Log 
duration  Δ PM 
(μg/m3) Δ Median  
EVI Deforestation  year 
rel. to clearance Prob.  of 
compliance  
Queue  length  0.002*  0.013*  0.000  –0.007  –0.001  
 (0.00)  (0.01)  (0.00)  (0.01)  (0.00)  
Log area 0.104***  0.020  0.001  0.432***  0.064**  
 (0.02)  (0.15)  (0.00)  (0.12)  (0.03)  
Log prod cap (TPA)  –
0.069***  0.025  –0.002**  –0.391***  –0.055***  
 (0.01)  (0.09)  (0.00)  (0.09)  (0.02)  
      
Application  type (base = new mine)      
Existing  mine  0.042  –0.173  –0.008  0.447  0.093  
 (0.08)  (0.49)  (0.01)  (0.48)  (0.10)  
Area/ Capacity 
enhancement  0.089*  0.072  0.005  –0.323  –0.119*  
 (0.05)  (0.32)  (0.00)  (0.29)  (0.06)  
      
Mine  type (riverbed = 
1) 0.132*  –0.284  0.004  –1.479***  –0.413***  
 (0.08)  (1.04)  (0.01)  (0.47)  (0.14)  
Letter  lists more  than 1 
district  0.569*  –
3.046***  -0.002  3.184***  0.403* ** 
 (0.31)  (0.45)  (0.01)  (0.60)  (0.06)  
Cleared  before  –0.100*  –0.139  –0.002  –0.207  0.005  
 (0.05)  (0.39)  (0.00)  (0.29)  (0.07)  
Violation  0.687***  4.061***  0.020***  3.885***  0.429***  
 (0.15)  (1.22)  (0.01)  (0.39)  (0.08)  
      
Nr. observations  934 676 667 318 318 
R2 0.379  0.261  0.078  0.103  0.078  
Adj. R2 0.366  0.243  0.054  0.065  0.038  
Note: Significance  coefficients are denoted with stars as follows: *** p < $0.01, ** p < 0.05 and * p 
< 0.1. All regressions include year fixed effects.   47 Online appendixes  
Online  appendix A: Trends in mines’  outcomes over  time 
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Trends -mines -outcomes -oline-
Appendix -A.pdf 
Online  appendix B: Visuali sing difference- in-difference regressions  
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Visualizing -diff-in-diff-
regressions -online-Appendix -B.pdf 
Online  appendix C: Mine  area and mine outcomes before and after  
treatment  
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Mine -area-mine -outcomes -
online-Appendix -C.pdf  
Online  appendix D: Alternative  specifications:  public hearings 
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Alternative-specifications -
public -hearings -Online-Appendix-D.pdf 
Online  appendix E: Alternative  specifications:  additional  factors  
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Alternative-specifications -
public -hearings -online-appendix-E.pdf 
Online  appendix F: Active mine  leases by district  
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Active -mine -leases -district-
Online-appendix-F.pdf 
Online  appendix G: Alternative specifications: other measures of landcover  
http://www.3ieimpact.org/sites/default/files/2019- 02/IE92-Other-measures -land-cover -
online-appendix-G.pdf   48 References 
Adivasi Majdoor Kisan Ekta Sangthan v MoEF (2012): Appeal No. 3/2011, National 
Green Tribunal, New Delhi, India. Available at: 
<https://indiankanoon.org/doc/19333350/> [ Accessed February 2018]. 
Ahmad, B and Wood, C, 2002. A comparative evaluation of the EIA systems in Egypt , 
Turkey and Tunisia. Environmental impact assessment review , 22(3), pp.213– 234. 
Aragón, FM and Rud, JP, 2013. Natural resources and l ocal communities: Evidence from 
a Peruvian g old mine. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy , 5(2), pp.1– 25. 
Aragón, FM and Rud, JP, 2016. Polluting i ndustries and a gricultural productivity: 
Evidence from m ining in Ghana. The Economic Journal , 126(597), pp.1980– 2011. 
Asher, S and Novosad, P, 2014. Digging for d evelopment: Mining booms and local 
economic development in India. Mimeo . 
Berma n, N, Couttenier, M, Rohner, D, and Thoenig, M, 2017. This mine is mine! How 
minerals fuel conflicts in Africa. American Economic Review, 107(6), pp.1564– 1610. 
Bisset R, 2000. Methods of consultation and public participation. In: N Lee and C 
George, eds. 2 000. Environmental impact assessment in developing and transitional 
countries : Principles, methods and practice.  New York: John Wiley & Sons , Inc. 
CEEW, 2014. State of environmental clearances in India: Procedures, timelines and delays across sectors and s tates . Council on Environment, Energy, and Water (CEEW). 
Didan, K, 2015. MOD13Q1 MODIS/Terra Vegetation Indices 16-Day L3 Global 250m 
SIN Grid V006, [data set]. NASA EOSDIS LP  DAAC . Available at: doi: 
https://doi.org/10.5067/MODIS/MOD13Q1.006  
Donaldson, D and Storeygard, A, 2016. The View from Above: Applications of satellite 
data in economics . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 30(4), pp.171– 198. 
Duflo, E, Greenstone, M, Pande, R and Ryan, N, 2013. Truth-telling by third-party 
auditors and the response of polluting firms: Experimental evidence from India. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics , 128(4):1499– 1545. 
Friedl, M, 2010. MCD12Q1 Land Cover Type Yearly L3 Global 500 m SIN Grid. NASA EOSDIS Land Processes DAAC, USGS Earth Resources Observation and Science 
(EROS) Center, Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Available at: 
<https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/dataset_discovery/modis/modis_products_table/mcd12q1> 
[Accessed  February 2018]. 
Ghosh, P, 2008. Public hearing: A mere formality? Live Mint, [online] Available at: 
<http://www.livemint.com/Home-Page/MD6bEVXOwDbJEGULhJMsVK/Public -hearing-a-
mere -formality.html> [Accessed February 2018]. 
Ghosh, S, 2013. Demystifying the environmental clearance process in India. National 
University of Juridical Sciences Law Review , 6(3), pp.433– 480. 49 Greenstone, M and Hanna, R, 2014. Environmental regulations, air and water pollution, 
and infant mortality in India. American Economic Review , 104(10), pp.3038-72. 
Greenstone, M, Nilekani, J, Pande, R, Sudarshan, A, Sugathan, A and Ryan, N, 2015. Lower pollution, longer lives: Life expectancy gains if India reduced particulate matter 
pollution. Economic and Political Weekly , 50(8), pp.40– 46. 
Jay, S, Jones, C, Slinn, P and Wood, C, 2007. Environmental impact assessment: Retrospect and prospect. Environmental impact assessment review , 27(4), pp.287– 300. 
Jeet Singh Kanwar v Union of India (2011): Appeal No 10/2011, National Green Tribunal.  
Landrigan, PJ, Fuller, R, Acosta, NJR, Adeyi, O, Arnold, R, Basu, NN, Baldé, AB, 
Bertollini, R, Bose-O’Reilly, S, Boufford, JI, Breysse, PN, Chiles, T, Mahidol, C, Coll -
Seck, AM, Cropper, ML, Fobil, J, Fuster, V, Greenstone, M, Haines, A, Hanrahan, D, Hunter, D, Khare, M, Krupnick, A, Lanphear, B, Lohani, B, Martin, K, Mathiasen, KV, 
McTeer, MA, Murray, CJL, Ndahimananjara, JD, Perera, F, Potočnik, J, Preker, AS, Ramesh, J, Rockström, J, Salinas, C, Samson, LD, Sandilya, K, Sly, PD, Smith, KR, 
Steiner, A, Stewart, RB, Suk, WA, Schayck, OCPv, Yadama, GN, Yumkella, K and 
Zhong, M, 2017. The Lancet Commission on pollution and health. The Lancet, 
391(10119), pp.462– 512.  
MoEFCC , 2006. Notification, Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, 
and Section 3, Sub-section (ii). New Delhi, India: Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC). Available at: <http://envfor.nic.in/legis/eia/so1533.pdf> [Accessed February 2018]. 
Mohan, MR and Pabreja, H, 2016. Public hearings in environmental clearance process: 
review of judicial intervention. Economic and Political Weekly , 51(50), pp.68– 75. 
Nadeem, O and Hameed, R, 2006. A critical review of the adequacy of EIA reports —
Evidence from Pakistan. World Academy of Science and Technology , 23(2006), pp.64–
70. 
Nadeem, O and Hameed, R, 2008. Evaluation of environmental impact assessment 
system in Pakistan. Environmental Impact Assessment Review , 28, pp.562– 571. 
Panigrahi, J and Amirapu, S, 2012. An Assessment of EIA Systems in India. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Review , 35, pp.23– 36. 
Rights and Resources, 2016. Land disputes  and stalled investments in India. 57.  
Toro, J, Requena, I and Zamorano, M, 2010. Environmental impact assessment in 
Colombia: critical analysis and proposals for improvement. Environmental Impact 
Assessment Review , 30(4), pp.247– 261. 
Wood, C, 2003. Environmental impact assessment in developing countries. International 
Development Planning Review , 25(3), pp.301– 321. 
Zubair, L, 2001. Challenges for environmental impact assessment in Sri Lanka. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Review , 21(5), pp.469– 478.  50 Other  publications in the 3ie Impact Evaluation Report Series  
The following reports are available from http://3ieimpact.org/evidence-
hub/publications/impact- evaluations  
Impacts of removing user fees for maternal health services on universal health coverage 
in Kenya, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 91. Abuya, T, Dennis, M, Matanda, D, Obare, F 
and Bellows, B, 2018. 
Impact of voice reminders to reinforce harvest aggregation services training for farmers 
in Mali , 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 90.  Osei, RD, Dzanku, FM, Osei -Akoto, I, Asante, 
F, Hodey, LS, Adu, PN, Adu-Ababio, K and Coulibaly, M, 2018. 
Impacts of Breakthrough’s school -based gender attitude change programme in Haryana, 
India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 89.  Jayachandran, S, Jain, T and Dhar, D, 2018. 
Hotspot interventions at scale: the effects of policing and city services on crime in 
Bogotá, Colombia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 88. Blattman, C, Green, D, Ortega, D 
and Tobón, S, 2018. 
Impact evaluation of the Philippine Special Program for Employment of Students, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 87. Beam, E, Linden, L, Quimbo, S and Richmond, H, 2018. 
Community -based distribution of oral HIV self-testing kits: experimental evidence from 
Zambia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 86. Hensen, B, Ayles, H, Mulubwa, C, Floyd, S, 
Schaap, A, Chiti, B, Phiri, M, Mwenge, L, Simwinga, M, Fidler S, Hayes, R, Bond, V and 
Mwinga, A, 2018. 
Evaluating the economic impacts of rural banking: experimental evidence from southern 
India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 85.  Field, E and Pande, R, 2018. 
Direct provision versus facility collection of HIV tests: impacts of self-testing among 
female sex workers in Uganda. 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 84. Ortblad, K, Musoke, 
DK, Ngabirano, T, Oldenburg, C and Bärnighausen, T, 2018.  
Increasing female sex worker HIV testing: effects of peer educators and HIV self-tests in Zambia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 83. Chanda, MM, Ortblad, KF, Mwale, M, Chongo, 
S, Kanchele, C, Kamungoma, N, Fullem, A, Bärnighausen, T and Oldenburg, CE, 2018. 
Community delivery of antiretroviral drugs: a non -inferiority matched-pair pragmatic 
cluster -randomized trial in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 82.  
Francis, JM, Geldsetzer, P, Asmus, G, Ulenga, N, Ambikapathi, R, Sando, D, Fawzi, W 
and Bärnighausen, T, 2018. 
Nourishing the future: targeting infants and their caregivers to reduce undernutrition in 
rural China, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 81. Cai, J, Luo, R, Li, H, Lien, J, Medina, A, Zhou, H and Zhang, L, 2018. 
Impacts of the World Food Programme’s interventions to treat malnutrition in Niger. 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 80. Brück, T, Ferguson, NTN, Ouédraogo, J and Ziegelhöfer, 
Z, 2018. 51 Impact evaluation of the World Food Programme’s moderate acute malnutrition 
treatment and prevention programmes in Sudan.  3ie Impact Evaluation Report 79.  
Guevarra, E, Mandalazi, E, Balegamire, S, Albrektsen, K, Sadler, K, Abdelsalam, K, 
Urrea, G and Alawad, S, 2018. 
Impact evaluation of WFP’s programs targeting moderate acute malnutrition in 
humanitarian situations in Chad. 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 78.  Saboya, M, Rudiger, 
J, Frize, J, Ruegenberg, D, Rodríguez Seco, A and McMillon, C, 2018. 
Improving midday meal delivery and encouraging micronutrient fortification among 
children in India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 77. Shastry, GK, Berry, J, Mukherjee, P, 
Mehta, S and Ruebeck, H, 2018. 
Evaluation of infant development centres: an early years intervention in Colombia, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 76. Andrew, A, Att anasio, O, Bernal, R, Cordona, L, Krutikova, 
S, Heredia, DM, Medina, C, Peña, X, Rubio-Codina, M and Vera-Hernandez, M, 2018. 
Can the wounds of war be healed? Experimental evidence on reconciliation in Sierra 
Leone. 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 75.  Cilliers, J, Dube, O and Siddiqi, B, 2018. 
Impact evaluation of the Menabe and Melaky development programme in Madagascar, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 74. Ring, H, Morey, M, Kavanagh, E, Kamto, K, McCarthy, 
N, Brubaker, J and Rakotondrafara, C, 2018. 
Impact evaluation of the Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Programme in Kenya, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 73. Bonilla, J, McCarthy, N, Mugatha, S, Rai, N, Coombes, A 
and Brubaker, J, 2018.  
Impact and adoption of risk -reducing drought-tolerant rice in Indi a, 3ie Impact Evaluation 
Report 72. Yamano, T, Dar, MH, Panda, A, Gupta, I, Malabayabas, ML and Kelly, E, 
2018. Poverty and empowerment impacts of the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project in India, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 71. Hoffmann, V, Rao, V, Datta, U, Sanyal, P, Surendra, V and 
Majumdar, S 2018. 
How should Tanzania use its natural gas? Citizens’ views from a nationwide Deliberative 
Poll, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 70.  Birdsall, N, Fishkin, J, Haqqi, F, Kinyondo, A, 
Moyo, M, Richmond, J and Sandefur, J, 2018.  
Impact evaluation of the conditional cash transfer program for secondary school attendance in Macedonia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 69. Armand, A and Carneiro, P, 
2018.  
Age at marriage, women’s education, and mother and child outcomes in Bangladesh,  3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 68. Field, E, Glennerster, R, Nazneen, S, Pimkina, S, Sen, I 
and Buchmann, N, 2018. 
Evaluating agricultural information dissemination in western Kenya,  3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 67. Fabregas, R, Kremer, M, Robinson, J and Schilbach, F, 2017. 52 General equilibrium impact assessment of the Productive Safety Net Program in 
Ethiopia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 66. Filipski, M, Taylor, JE, Abegaz, GA, Ferede, 
T, Taffesse, AS and Diao, X, 2017.  
Impact of the Uddeepan programme on child health and nutrition in India, 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 65. Kochar, A, Sharma, A and Sharma, A, 2017. 
Evaluating oral HIV self-testing to increase HIV testing uptake among truck drivers in 
Kenya, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 64.  Kelvin, EA, Mwai, E, Romo, ML, George, G, 
Govender, K, Mantell, JE, Strauss, M, Nyaga, EN and Odhiambo, JO, 2017. 
Integration of EPI and paediatric HIV services for improved ART initiation in Zimbabwe, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 63. Prescott, M, Boeke, C, Gotora, T, Mafaune, HW, Motsi, W, Graves, J, Mangwiro, A and McCarthy, E, 2017. 
Increasing male partner HIV testing using self-test kits in Kenya,  3ie Impact Evaluation 
Report 62. Gichangi, A, Korte, JE, Wambua, J, Vrana, C and Stevens, D, 2017. Evaluating the impact of community health worker integration into prevention of mother -
to-child transmission of HIV services in Tanzania, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 61. 
Nance, N, McCoy, S, Ngilangwa, D, Masanja, J, Njau, P and Noronha, R, 2017. 
Using HIV self-testing to promote male partner and couples testing in Kenya, 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 60. Thirumurthy, H, Omanga, E, Obonyo, B, Masters, S and Agot, K, 
2017. 
Increasing male partner HIV self-testing at antenatal care clinics in Kenya, 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 59. Gichangi, A, Korte, JE, Wambua, J, Vrana, C and Stevens, D, 
2017. 
Impact of free availability of public childcare on labour supply and child development in 
Brazil , 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 58. Attanasio, O, Paes de Barros, R, Carneiro, P, 
Evans, D, Lima, L, Olinto, P and Schady, N, 2017. 
Estimating the effects of a low -cost early stimulation and parenting education programme 
in Mexico, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 57. Cardenas, S, Evans, D and Holland, P, 
2017. 
The Better Obstetrics in Rural Nigeria study: an impact evaluation of the Nigerian 
Midwives Service Scheme, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 56.  Okeke, E, Glick, P, 
Abubakar, IS, Chari, AV, Pitchforth, E, Exley, J, Bashir, U, Setodji, C, Gu, K and 
Onwujekwe, O, 2017.  
The Productive Safety Net Programme in Ethiopia: impacts on children’s schooling, 
labour and nutritional status, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 55.  Berhane, G, Hoddinott, J, 
Kumar, N and Margolies, A, 2016.  
The impact of youth skills training on the financial behaviour, employability and educational choice in Morocco, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 54. Bausch, J, Dyer, P, 
Gardiner, D, Kluve, J and Mizrokhi, E, 2016. 53 Using advertisements to create demand for voluntary medical male circumcision in South 
Africa, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 53. Frade, S, Friedman, W, Rech, D and Wilson, N, 
2016. 
The use of peer referral incentives to increase demand for voluntary medical male 
circumcision in Zambia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 52. Zanolini, A, Bolton, C, Lyabola, 
LL, Phiri, G, Samona, A, Kaonga, A and Harsha Thirumurthy, H, 2016. Using smartphone raffles to increase demand for voluntary medical male circumcision in 
Tanzania, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 51. Mahler, H and Bazant, E, 2016. 
Voluntary medical male circumcision uptake through soccer in Zimbabwe, 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 50. DeCelles, J, Kaufman, Z, Bhauti, K, Hershow, R, Weiss, H, Chaibva, C, Moyo, N, Braunschweig, E, Mantula, F, Hatzold, K and Ross, D, 2016. 
Measuring the impact of SMS -based interventions on uptake of voluntary medical male 
circumcision in Zambia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 49. Leiby, K, Connor, A, Tsague, 
L, Sapele, C, Koanga, A, Kakaire, J and Wang, P, 2016. 
Assessing the impact of delivering messages through intimate partners to create demand 
for voluntary medical male circumcision in Uganda, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 48. 
Semeere, AS, Bbaale, DS, Castelnuovo, B, Kiragga, A, Kigozi, J, Muganzi, A, Kambugu, 
A and Coutinho, AG, 2016. 
Optimising the use of economic interventions to increase demand for voluntary medical 
male circumcision in Kenya, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 47. Thirumurthy, H, Omanga, 
E, Rao, SO, Murray, K, Masters, S and Agot, K, 2016. 
The impact of earned and windfall cash transfers on livelihoods and conservation in 
Sierra Leone, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 46. Bulte, E, Conteh, B, Kontoleon, A, List, J, 
Mokuwa, E, Richards, P, Turley, T and Voors, M, 2016. 
Property tax experiment in Pakistan: Incentivising tax collection and improving 
performance, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 45. Khan, A, Khwaja, A and Olken, B, 2016. 
Impact of mobile message reminders on tuberculosis treatment outcomes in Pakistan, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 44. Mohammed, S, Glennerster, R and Khan, A, 2016. 
Making networks work for policy: Evidence from agricultural technology adoption in 
Malawi, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 43. Beaman, L, BenYishay, A, Fatch, P, Magruder, 
J and Mobarak, AM, 2016. 
Estimating the impact and cost-effectiveness of expanding access to secondary 
education in Ghana, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 42. Dupas, P, Duflo, E and Kremer, M, 
2016. 
Evaluating the effectiveness of computers as tutors in China, 3ie Impact Evaluation 
Report 41. Mo, D, Bai, Y, Boswell, M and Rozelle, S, 2016.  
Micro entrepreneurship support programme in Chile, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 40. 
Martínez, CA, Puentes, EE and Ruiz -Tagle, JV, 2016. 54 Thirty -five years later: evaluating the impacts of a child health and family planning 
programme in Bangladesh, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 39. Barham, T, Kuhn, R, 
Menken, J and Razzaque, A, 2016. 
Effectiveness of a rural sanitation programme on diarrhoea, soil -transmitted helminth 
infection and malnutrition in India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 38.  Clasen, T, Boisson, 
S, Routray, P, Torondel, B, Bell, M, Cumming, O, Ensink, J, Freeman, M and Jenkins, M, 
2016. 
Evaluating the impact of vocational education vouchers on out-of-school youth in Kenya, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 37. Hicks, JH, Kremer, M, Mbiti, I and Miguel, E, 2016.  
Removing barriers to higher education in Chile: evaluation of peer effects and 
scho larships for test preparation, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 36. Banerjee, A, Duflo E 
and Gallego, F, 2016.  
Sustainability of impact: dimensions of decline and persistence in adopting a biofortified crop in Uganda, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 35. McNiven, S, Gilligan, DO and Hotz, C 
2016. 
A triple win? The impact of Tanzania’s Joint Forest Management programme on 
livelihoods, governance and forests , 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 34. Persha, L and 
Meshack, C, 2016. 
The effect of conditional transfers on intimate partner violence: evidence from Northern 
Ecuador, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 33. Hidrobo, M, Peterman, A and Heise, L, 2016. 
The effect of transfers and preschool on children’s cognitive development in Uganda, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 32. Gillian , DO and Roy, S, 2016. 
Can egovernance reduce capture of public programmes? Experimental evidence from 
India’s employment guarantee, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 31. Banerjee, A, Duflo, E, 
Imbert, C, Mathew, S and Pande, R, 2015. 
Improving maternal and chi ld health in India: evaluating demand and supply strategies, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 30. Mohanan, M, Miller, G, Forgia, GL, Shekhar, S and 
Singh, K, 2016. 
Smallholder access to weather securities in India: demand and impact on production 
decisions, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 28. Ceballos, F, Manuel, I, Robles, M and Butler, 
A, 2015. 
What happens once the intervention ends? The medium -term impacts of a cash transfer 
programme in Malawi, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 27. Baird, S, Chirwa, E, McIntosh, C  
and Özler, B, 2015. 
Validation of hearing screening procedures in Ecuadorian schools, 3ie Impact Evaluation 
Report 26. Muñoz, K, White, K, Callow -Heusser, C and Ortiz, E, 2015.  
Assessing the impact of farmer field schools on fertilizer use in China, 3ie I mpact 
Evaluation Report 25. Burger, N, Fu, M, Gu, K, Jia, X, Kumar, KB and Mingliang, G, 
2015. 55 The SASA! study: a cluster randomised trial to assess the impact of a violence and HIV 
prevention programme in Kampala, Uganda, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 24. Watts, C, 
Devries, K, Kiss, L, Abramsky, T, Kyegombe, N and Michau, L, 2014.  
Enhancing food production and food security through improved inputs: an evaluation of 
Tanzania’s National Agricultural Input Voucher Scheme with a focus on gender impacts, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 23.  Gine, X, Patel, S, Cuellar-Martinez, C, McCoy, S and 
Lauren, R, 2015. 
A wide angle view of learning: evaluation of the CCE and LEP programmes in Haryana, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 22. Duflo, E, Berry, J, Mukerji, S and Shotland, M, 2015. 
Shelter from the storm: upgrading housing infrastructure in Latin American slums , 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 21.  Galiani, S, Gertler, P, Cooper, R, Martinez, S, Ross, A and 
Undurraga, R, 2015. 
Environmental and socioeconomic impacts of Mexico’s payments for ecosystem services 
programme, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 20.  Alix-Garcia, J, Aronson, G, Radeloff, V, 
Ramirez -Reyes, C, Shapiro, E, Sims, K and Yañez -Pagans, P, 2015. 
A randomised evaluation of the effects of an agricultural insurance programme on rural households’ behaviour: evidence from China, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 19. Cai, J, de 
Janvry, A and Sadoulet, E, 2014. 
Impact of malaria control and enhanced literacy instruction on educational outcomes 
among school children in Kenya: a multi -sectoral, prospective, randomised evaluation, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 18. Brooker, S and Halliday, K, 2015. 
Assessing long-term impacts of conditional cash transfers on children and young adults 
in rural Nicaragua,  3ie Impact Evaluation Report 17.  Barham, T, Macours, K, Maluccio, 
JA, Regalia, F, Aguilera, V and Moncada, ME, 2014. 
The impact of mother literacy and participation programmes on child learning: evidence 
from a randomised evaluation in India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 16. Banerji, R, 
Berry, J and Shortland, M, 2014. 
A youth wage subsidy experiment for South Africa, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 15. 
Levinsohn, J, Rankin, N, Roberts, G and Schöer, V, 2014. 
Providing collateral and improving product market access for smallholder farmers: a 
randomised evaluation of inventory credit in Sierra Leone, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 14. Casaburi, L, Glennerster, R, Suri, T and Kamara, S, 2014. 
Scaling up male circumcision service provision: results from a randomised evaluation in Malawi, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 13. Thornton, R, Chinkhumba, J, Godlonton, S and 
Pierotti, R, 2014. 
Targeting the poor: evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia, 3ie Impact Evaluation 
Report 12. Atlas, V, Banerjee, A, Hanna, R, Olken, B, Wai -poi, M and Purnamasari, R, 
2014. 56 An impact evaluation of information disclosure on elected representatives’ performance: 
evidence from rural and urban India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 11. Banerjee, A, 
Duflo, E, Imbert, C, Pande, R, Walton, M and Mahapatra, B, 2014. 
Truth-telling by third-party audits and the response of polluting firms: Experimental 
evidence from India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 10. Duflo, E, Greenstone, M, Pande, 
R and Ryan, N, 2013. 
No margin, no mission? Evaluating the role of incentives in the distribution of public 
goods in Zambia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 9.  Ashraf, N, Bandiera, O and Jack, K, 
2013. 
Paying for performance in China’s battle against anaemia, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 
8. Zhang, L, Rozelle, S and Shi, Y, 2013. 
Social and economic impacts of Tuungane: final report on the effects of a community -
driven reconstruction programme in the Democratic Republic of Congo, 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Report 7. Humphreys, M, Sanchez de la Sierra, R and van der Windt, P, 
2013. The impact of daycare on maternal labour supply and child development in Mexico, 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Report 6. Angeles, G, Gadsden, P, Galiani, S, Gertler, P, Herrera, A, 
Kariger, P and Seira, E, 2014. 
Impact evaluation of the non-contributory social pension programme 70 y más i n Mexico , 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 5. Rodríguez, A, Espinoza, B, Tamayo, K, Pereda, P, 
Góngora, V, Tagliaferro, G and Solís, M, 2014. 
Does marginal cost pricing of electricity affect groundwater pumping behaviour of 
farmers? Evidence from India, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 4. Meenakshi, JV, Banerji, 
A, Mukherji, A and Gupta, A, 2013. 
The GoBifo project evaluation report: Assessing the impacts of community -driven 
development in Sierra Leone, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 3. Casey, K, Glennerster, R 
and Miguel, E, 2013. 
A rapid assessment randomised-controlled trial of improved cookstoves in rural Ghana, 
3ie Impact Evaluation Report 2. Burwen, J and Levine, DI, 2012. 
The promise of preschool in Africa: A randomised impact evaluation of early childhood 
development in rural Mozambique, 3ie Impact Evaluation Report 1.  Martinez, S, 
Naudeau, S and Pereira, V, 2012.  The Indian  environmental clearance process 
requires all major capital investment projects 
by the private sector or government to seek regulatory approval prior to beginning construction. It is the centerpiece of environmental regulation of development, playing a particularly important role in oversight of the mining sector. The authors evaluated the impact of a set of reforms to the clearance process, which included subjecting larger projects to scrutiny from regulators, independent experts and the public through hearings. They also matched publicly available administrative data on mines’ clearance applications with satellite data on pollution and vegetation coverage to measure mines’ environmental performance. There was no evidence that public hearings significantly altered the costs or benefits of the clearance process. Mines that applied for clearance after the reforms experienced substantially shorter clearance times, but were more likely to deforest illegally before receiving clearance. 
 Impact Ev aluation Series
 Internatio nal Initiative for Impact Evaluation  
202-203, Rectangle One D-4, Saket District Centre  
New Delhi – 110017  
India
 3ie@3ieimpact.org  
Tel: +91 11 4989 4444  
 www.3ieimpact.org
