 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 8 4 
 
Impact of ICTs -in-Agriculture 
on Rural Resilience in 
Developing Countries  
 
WILLIAM HANSON & RICHARD HEEKS  
 
 
2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-1-905469 -89-5 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
 
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
B1. RESEARCH DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
B2. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK  ................................ ................................ ...........................  8 
C. Findings: ICT4Ag, Community and Household Resilience  .........................  13 
C1. ICT4A G STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE ATTRIBUT ES ................................ ........................  13 
C2. ICT4A G WEAKENING RESILIENCE ATTRIBUTES  ................................ ..............................  30 
C3. HOUSEHOLD AND COMMUNITY RESILIENCE ATTRIBUTES SUMMARY  ................................ .. 32 
D. Analysis: Explaining ICTs’ Impact on Rural Resilience  ..............................  39 
D1.  ICT4A G AND RESILIENCE OF RURAL HOUSEHOLDS  ................................ ........................  39 
D2.  ICT4A G AND RESILIENCE OF RURAL COMMUNITIES  ................................ .......................  41 
D3.  CONCEPTUALISING ICT4A G AND RESILIENCE  ................................ ................................  42 
E. Conclusions and Recommendations  ................................ ........................  44 
E1. REVISITING THE RESEARCH QUESTION ................................ ................................ ..........  44 
E2. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE  ................................ ................................ ............  45 
E3. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ .....................  47 
E4. A CRITICAL REFLECTION ON THE RABIT  FRAMEWORK  ................................ ....................  49 
E5. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH  ................................ ................................ ..........  52 
 
APPENDIX A: ICT4A G LITERATURE MENTIONING RESILIENCE  ................................ ................  53 
APPENDIX B: SUMMARY OF SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW  ................................ ...............  55 
APPENDIX C: RESILIENCE MARKER DESCRIPTORS  ................................ ................................ . 56 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  59 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
1 
 Impact of ICTs -in-Agriculture on Rural 
Resilience in Developing Countries  
 
William Hanson  
Centre for Development 
Informatics, University of 
Manchester, UK  & Richard Heeks  
Centre for Development 
Informatics, University of 
Manchester, UK  
2020  
 
Abstract  
Agriculture remains  the dominant sector for rural areas  in developing countries.  However, 
short -term shocks (e.g. conflict , economic crisis) and long -term trends (e.g. climate change) 
hamper and can even reverse attempted gains in agricultural productivity and related rural 
development outcomes.  Influenced by the current sustainable development paradigm, it is 
increasingly a cknowledged that , to address this, rural households and communities must 
strengthen their resilience . 
 
Given their growing role in rural livelihoods, information and communication technologies 
(ICTs) will be a key part of resilience -building.  Yet we curre ntly know very little about this.  
To address this knowledge gap, a systematic literature review was undertaken to establish 
two things.  First, the extent to which use of ICT s-in-agric ulture  (ICT4Ag)  is weakening or 
strengthening the resilience of rural h ouseholds and communities in developing countries.  
Second, an explanation of why the observed impacts are occurring.  
 
Measuring resilience using  the RABIT (Resilience Assessment Benchmarking and Impact 
Toolkit) framework, current reported evidence suggest s ICTs are strengthening rural 
resilience far more than weakening it.  However, the impact is highly uneven.  Household 
resilience is built far more than community resilience, and there is a strong differential 
impact across different resilience attributes : equality in particular is reported as being 
undermined almost as much as enhanced.  A new conceptual model is inductively created to 
explain some of these outcomes.  It highlights the importance of individual user 
motivations, complementary resources req uired to make ICT4Ag systems support resilience, 
and the role of wider systemic factors such as institutions and structural relations.  
 
The paper draws policy/practice conclusions: more equal focus on both household - and 
community -level resili ence,  more at tention to the resilience -weakening potential of ICTs, 
ensuring perceived utility of digital applications among rural use rs, encouraging use of more 
complex ICT4Ag systems, and looking beyond the technology to make parallel, 
complementary changes in resour ce provision and development of rural institutions and 
social structures.  Conclusions are also drawn about the conceptualisation of resilience: 
better incorporation of agency and power, and greater clarity on resilience system 
boundaries and indicators.  
 
Overall, we contribute new frameworks, new evidence, new practical guidance and a 
research agenda for those seeking to strengthen rural resilience through use of ICTs.   Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Agriculture is the key  economic activity in rural areas of developing countries ( Deloitte, 
2012; Torero, 2014 ).  It therefore presents the best mechanism  to alleviate poverty, to 
improve food security and more generally to improve the livelihoods of rural population s 
(Mohamad & Gombe, 2017; World Bank, 2018 ).  However, the relative poverty of rural 
areas,  their lack of access to assets and  the relative weakness of their institutions makes 
them particularly vulnerable to both short -term shocks ( e.g. conflicts, economic crisis) and 
long -term trends ( e.g. climate change) (Heeks  & Ospina, 2016a) .  This vulnerability , in turn, 
limits the productivity of agriculture and limits associated  socio -economic development of 
rural areas .  Influenced by the current development paradigm – sustainable development – 
it is thus increasingly ack nowledged that rural areas can only develop if they increase  their 
resilience given its definition as  their ability to withstand, recover from, adapt to, and 
potentially transform amid the change and uncertainty  brought on by  short -term shocks and 
longer -term change  (Heeks & Ospina, 2016a; Heeks & Ospina, 2019; Lipper et al. , 2018 ). 
 
Simultaneously, i nformation and communications technologies (ICTs) such as mobile phones  
are now regarded as essential enablers to rural development generally and to agricultural 
development specifically .  For example, through digitisation ICTs have reduced the cost, 
time and risk associated with farmers’ purchase - and sales -related journeys (Heeks, 2018; 
Sife et al.,  2010; Martin & Abbott, 2011 ).  They have improved a gricultural value -chain 
processes ( e.g. purchasing and selling) through market information and financial services 
(Baumüller, 2015; Kikulwe et al., 2014;  Munyegera & Matsumoto, 2016 ), and can even 
enhance and change market structure through the removal of intermediaries  and the 
introduction of farmers to supply -chain contracting  (Baumüller, 2018; Goyal, 2010; Muto & 
Yamano, 2009 ).  Conversely,  though, use of ICT s-in-agric ulture has also been associated with 
negative impacts such as inter -community conflicts  and inequalities (Baird & Hartter, 2017; 
Duncombe, 2014; Krone et al. , 2016).  
 
Despite the  sizeable literature in this area, Duncombe (2016: 230) concludes that most 
recent ICTs -and-agriculture research has focused on “...narrow measures of output (market  
prices, market penetration and so on)…”, and that there is a need to establish ICTs’ 
“…broader impact on households, communities and welfare”.   There is also an identified 
need to understand the longer -term rather than short -term impact of ICT s-in-agric ulture 
(Duncombe, 2016; Walsham, 2017).   This knowledge gap can be seen to apply particularly to 
understanding the link between ICTs and rural resilience  given the broad and longer -term 
perspective on rural development that resilience offers (Hallegatte et al., 2017; Wilson, 
2010) .  There is a significant literature on agriculture and resilience: for example, a Google 
Scholar search of “ intitle:resilience (intitle:agriculture OR intitle:agricultural)” returned 713 
results.  But there is very little evidence  linking this to ICTs.   As detailed in Appendix A, a 
systematic  search was under taken for literature on ICTs, agriculture and resilience.  Review 
of hits found only 13 relevant papers.  Of these, the majority just mention the term 
“resilience” but without any definition or relevant conceptualisation.  Only two relevant 
items – both the work of Ospina and Heeks – were found.  T heir work  provide s some 
evidence that ICTs -for-agriculture (ICT4Ag) interventions can have an impact on rural 
resilience, but they ev idence this on the basis of just a single pilot study.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
3 
 There is therefore an important knowledge gap to be addressed, which this paper 
encapsulates through its focal research question:  
To what extent is the use of ICT s-in-agric ulture weakening or strength ening the 
resilience of rural households and communities in developing countries , and why ? 
 
To answer this question, the research reported here focuses on generic resilience that 
covers all shocks and trends, as opposed to specific resilience that targets individual  shocks, 
such as drought resilience or flood resilience or climate resilience, etc. (Folke et al. , 2010).  
As described in more detail in the next section, it therefore uses a generic resilience 
framework – the Resilience Assessment Benchmarking and Impact Toolkit (RABIT) 
framework – developed by Angelica Ospina (Ospina, 2013).  Consis tent with the wider 
evidence of both positive and negative impacts of ICT s-in-agric ulture, this research 
addresses both  strengthening and weakening of resilience.   Consistent with the call by 
Duncombe (2016) and others, the research will look at resilience of both households and 
communities . 
 
Four specific objectives will therefore be addressed to answer the research question:  
1. To evaluate  the extent to which ICTs-in-agriculture literature reports  strengthen ing or 
weaken ing RABIT  resilience attribute s of rural households and communities in 
developing countries ; 
2. To analyse  and explain  the overall impact of ICTs -in-agriculture on rural  resilience;  
3. To highlight implicat ions for future policies, practice  and research in the ICT4Ag domain ; 
and 
4. To critically reflect on application of the RABIT framework based on experience of its 
operationalisation.  
The next section of the paper provides details of the research methodology – systematic 
literature review – and the RABIT -based research perspective.  Section C lays out the 
findings of ICTs’ impact on each of the RABIT framework resilience attributes; addressing the 
first objective  above .  Analysis and explanation  of ICTs ’ impac t on rural resilience is then 
discussed in Section D; in line with the second objective.  The concluding section addresses 
the last two objectives, making recommendations for policy, practice and future research 
alongside critique of the framework.  
 
In tot o, the paper contributes to our general understanding about the relation between ICTs 
and resilience; important given the growing role of resilience within the international 
development agenda  alongside the dearth of current research on ICTs and resilience  (Heeks 
& Ospina, 2019).  More specifically, it broadens our understanding of the impact of ICT s-in-
agric ulture; directly exposing the impact that ICTs have on resilience of rural households and 
communities.  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
4 
 B. Methodology  
 
B1. Research D esign  
A systematic literature review (SLR) approach was selected as the most appropriate choice 
to address the research question because it can establish a general isable and informative 
evidence -based conclusion using existing evidence  (Boland et al. , 2017 ).  The review was 
conducted using Google Scholar and focused on empirical literature on ICT4Ag in developing 
countries .  Google Scholar was used because it has the widest coverage of multi -disciplinary 
literature ( Khabsa & Giles, 2014 ), which is crucial since I CT4Ag is inherently multi -
disciplinary .  The SLR was conducted using an adaptation of the preferred reporting items 
for systematic reviews and meta -analysis (PRISMA) protocol ( Moher et al. , 2009 ).  There 
follow  details of the inclusion and exclusion criter ia, the search strategy, the search results, 
and the content analysis of the SLR conducted.  
 
B1.1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
There are six inclusion criteria utilised in this SLR : 
 First, our focus mandates inclusion of studies that only focused on the use of ICTs in 
rural agriculture1 in developing countries2.  This excluded studies that either focused on 
high -income  countries or urban areas  and those that had no focus on the use of ICT s-in-
agriculture . 
 Second, only studies that discussed in some detail the impact of using ICT s-in-agric ulture 
among farming households or communities were included  because only such studies 
could provide the necessary level of detail to answer the research questi on.  This 
criteri on was implemented in two steps: based on the relevance of the study, and based 
on the level of “impact details” provided by the study .  The relevance step assessed 
whether the study analysed any impacts experienced by farming households o r 
communities due to the use of ICT s-in-agric ulture .  This was done through screening 
title, abstract, and full -text of the sources .  The “ impact details” assessment step  was 
done through  full-text reading, and including  only those articles that discussed the 
impact of the use o f ICT s-in-agric ulture in detail . 
 Third, only ICT4Ag empirical litera ture that used primary data ( either alone or alongside 
secondary data) was considered  in order to ensure a direct evidence base.  
 Fourth, only those studies that were either open access  or were accessible through the 
University of Manchester library system were considered ; otherwise it would not have 
been possible to read them.  
 Fifth, since the adoption and use of ICTs (especially mo bile phones) in developing 
countries has proliferated only since  the mid -2000s ( Aker & Mbiti, 2010; Jack & Suri, 
2011 ), 2005 was set as a boundary for the search period . 
 Lastly, only studies written in English were considered . 
 
B1.2 Search strategy  
The sea rch strategy was, initially, created ite ratively using generic keywords  such as 
“agriculture” and “information and communication technologies”.  H owever, due to the 
                                                      
1 Here, a griculture is understood in a broad  sense that comprises farming, animal husbandry, and fishing.  
2 Defined  as “…those nations identified by the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee as low - and middle -
income Official Development Assistance recipients” (Heeks, 2018: 10).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
5 
 challenges of incorporating mobile phones and other ICTs in one search, and the  large 
numbe r of results3 returned with generic keywords, formulating various strategies was 
necessary to retrieve relevant literature .  The Google Scholar “intitle” operator was utilised 
to filter and retrieve articles whose focus was agriculture and ICTs .  Moreover,  various 
“intitle” keyword combinations using “AND” or “OR” operators were employed to ensure a 
more comprehensive search .  For example, to retrieve articles focusing on mobile phones,  
the “intitle:phone OR intitle:phones” search string was used to include  both the singular and 
plural form .  The use of the keyword “developing countries” to only identify literature that 
focussed on developing countries was not included as it did not have any significant 
influence on the number of results returned .  Overall, three search strings were finalised, as 
shown in Table B1. 
 
Table B1: Search strategy  
Search Strategy  Search String  
1. mobile phones, agriculture 
and livelihoods/welfare  (intitle:phones OR intitle:phone OR intitle:“mobile 
money”) (intitle:livelihood OR in title:livelihoods OR 
intitle:welfare) agriculture  
2. mobile phones, agriculture, 
and impact  intitle:phones OR intitle:phone OR intitle: “mobile 
money” farm agriculture impact  
3. ICTs, agriculture, and impact  (intitle:“information and communication technology” 
OR intitle:“information and communication 
technologies”) (intitle:agriculture OR intitle:agricultural 
OR intitle:farmers) impact  
Time period  2005 onwards  
 
In executing this search, it is acknowledged that it would not deliver every possible r elevant 
source.  However, it was designed to produce a sufficiently -large body of evidence to enable 
relevant conclusions to be drawn.  
 
B1.3 Search results  
The search results are presented in four stages: identification, screening, eligibility, and 
inclusion; as summarised in  Figure B1 using the PRISMA protocol . 
 
Upon execution4 of the three search strategies (stage 1 identification), a total of 1,004 
articles (50 from search 1; 652 from search 2; and 302 from search 3) were identified .  
During the s econd stage (screening), 64 duplicate articles were identified and removed, 
leaving 940 articles for further screening .  Out of the 940 articles, 62 were removed because 
they could not be retrieved (no access), leaving 878 articles .  The titles and abstracts of the 
remaining articles were screened against the inclusion criteria discussed above , resulting in 
the removal of a further 653 articles, primarily because they were non -empirical, had no 
focus on ICTs and agriculture, or had no focus on developing countries .  At the third stage 
(eligibility), full -text of  the remaining 225 articles was  assessed against the inclusion criteria, 
and a further 150 articles were removed, mainly because they were either not relevant or 
                                                      
3 For example, a search of  'agriculture “information and communication technology ” OR “mobile phone* ” 
impact' returned around 17,500 results.  
4 The search results were executed and extracted between 6th and 15th of June 2019.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
6 
 did not use prim ary data .  The remaining 75 articles were assessed against the “reported 
outc ome” step two inclusion criterion , and a further 30 articles were removed bec ause the 
level of impact detail  was very limited, leaving 45 articles which were included in the 
syste matic literature review (inclu sion stage) .  Table B2 shows a summary of the 45 final 
articles included in the systematic literature review grouped by search strategy and 
published year.  
 
Table B2: Summary of included articles  
 Published year  
Search  
strate gy 2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  Total  
1  1 1 2   1  1 1 1  8 
2  2 1 1 4 2 1 7 5 4  1 28 
3 1  3 1 1 2   1    9 
Total  1 3 5 4 5 4 2 7 7 5 1 1 45 
 
              Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
7 
  
Figure B1: Flow diagram of the selection process based on the PRISMA protocol .  Source: 
adapted from Moher et al. (2009)  
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
8 
 B1.4 Content analysis  
The contents of the articles were analysed using a framework synthesis (Oliver et al ., 2008) 
method – an integrative synthesis approach (Boland et al. , 2017) – since the RABIT 
framework guided data extraction and analysis .  An inductive thematic synthesis (Thomas & 
Harden, 2008) was used to map data that did not fit into the RABIT framework, which 
helped to inform critique  of the framework .  Two types of data ca tegories were extracted: 
study meta -data ( e.g. study characteristics, study duration, country) and study findings (the 
outcome) .  Using NVivo, findings were coded against the resilience attributes (for household 
and communities separately), and summarised using two categories: positive, when findings 
suggested strengthening; and negative, when they suggested weakening .  Initial coding 
instances were discussed between the two authors to ensure consistency, with some 
iteration of classification as exact codin g meanings were clarified and agreed.  Unique 
instances of sources suggesting weakening and/or strengthening of resilience attributes 
were then aggregated (see Appendix B ), and statistical techniques were used to summarise 
the overall resilience score for each attribute (see Section  C3). 
 
B2. Analytical Framework  
The previous sub -section has looked at the research design; this sub-section moves on to 
discuss the analytical  framework that was applied to the  identified  and included literature .  
It provides the foundation of how household and communities are understood, and link s 
them with the resilience conceptualisation through the RABIT framework .  It also discusses 
the link between ICTs and household/community  resilience, establishing how ICTs’ 
contribution to resilience can be analysed.  
 
B2.1 Household and community as systems  
Here , household and community are understood as adaptive and open complex systems .  
This understa nding is consistent with the system s thinking approach, where systems are 
understood to have boundaries (Checkland, 1981) .  In this case, the liveliho od system  – 
household or community – contains components (livelihood determinants, capabilities, 
functioni ngs), processes (function s), and properties (resilience)  within the system boundary, 
while  the vulnerability context and development outcomes lie outside the boundary (see 
Figure B2) (Ospina & Heeks, 2010) .  Community and household are also considered open  
systems because they can influence and be influenc ed by the external environment:  the 
short -term shocks and long -term trends  that are the focus for resilience  (Heeks & Ospina, 
2015) . 
 
Following this understanding, systems’ ( i.e. community, household) adap tive capacities can 
be understood either through their components (assets, institutions, structures) and 
processes (functions) , or through their (sub -)properties – resilience ( Ospina & Heeks, 2010) .  
Although this paper  will focus on the latter approach,  the two perspectives are just different 
ways  of looking at the same system .  Systems’ adapti ve capacities are derived from their  
components, processes, and properties ( Ospina & Heeks, 2010); thus, consequently, 
discussions of assets, institutions, among oth ers, will be done alongsi de that of the system 
property:  resilience .  Next, the concept of resilience as a systemic property is discussed.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
9 
  
Figure B2: Livelihood systems: components, processes, and properties .  Source: Ospina 
(2013)  
B2.2 Resilience concep tualisation  
As defined in the Introduction, this paper understands resilience as a system property that 
includes not only withstanding and recovering from short -term shocks but also adaptation 
and potential transformation in relation to longer -term trends.   This understanding, which is 
the foundation of the RABIT framework, provides a more complete and deep view  of 
resilience – one that is aligned with the concepts of sustainability ( Heeks & Ospina, 2015 ). 
 
The conceptualisation of resilience as a systemic property can be grouped into two streams: 
one that understands it as a single “monolithic” property, and one that considers it to have 
multiple sub -properties ( Ospina & Heeks, 2010) .  Increasingly, literature is aligned with the 
latter understanding  and it is this literature that forms the basis for the creation of the 
RABIT framework  (for further details, see Ospina, 2013 and Heeks & Ospina, 2019 ).  From a 
RABIT perspective, resilient systems are characterised by a series of foundational and 
enablin g sub -properties .  The foundational sub -properties (robustness, self -organisation, 
learning) are fundamental for any resilient system, and thus are directly related to its 
definition: robustness relates to withstanding; self -organisation to recovery; and t ogether 
self-organisation and learning are related to the long -term adaptation (Heeks & Ospina, 
2019 ).  The enabling attributes (redundancy, rapidity, scale, diversity, flexibility, equality) 
are considered crucial facilitators for the operation of the fou ndational attributes (Heeks & 
Ospina, 2015 ).  The last sub -property – equality – is seen as a key measure relating to 
successful long -term transformation of a system.   The definitions for these sub -properties 
are summarised in Table B3. 
 
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
10 
 Table B3: Resili ence sub -properties’ definitions .  Source: adapted from Ospina (2013)  
Resilience  
Attributes  Definition  
FOUNDATIONAL ATTRIBUTES  
Robustness   The ability of the system to maintain its characteristics and performance 
in the face of environmental shocks and  fluctuations.  
Self-
Organisation   The ability of the system to independently re -arrange its functions and 
processes in the face of an external disturbance, without being forced by 
external influences.  
Learning   The capacity of the system to generate feedback with which to gain or 
create knowledge and strengthen skills and capacities .  Closely linked to 
the system’s ability to experiment, discover and innovate.  
ENABLING ATTRIBUTES  
Redundancy   The extent to which system resources and institutions are substitutable; 
for example, in the event of disruption or degradation.  
Rapidity   The speed at which assets can be accessed or mobilised by system 
stakeholders to achieve goals in an efficient manner.  
Scale   The breadth of assets and structures a system can access to effectively 
overcome or bounce back from or adapt to the effects of disturbances.  
Diversity & 
Flexibility    The ability of the system to undertake different courses of actions with 
the resources at i ts disposal, while enabling the system  to innovate and 
utilise the opportunities that may arise from change.  
Equality   The extent to which the system provides equal access to rights, resources 
and opportunities to its members.  
 
Apart from the rich conceptualisation of resilience that the RABIT framework provides, this 
paper employs it because, first, it supports evaluation at both  household and community 
level ( Heeks & Ospina, 2015 ), since each can be understood, separately, as a  system ; and 
second, it has detailed documentation and existing  agricultural case analysis, which not only 
make it relatively easy to operationalise but also justifies its applicability  to the current 
domain . 
 
B2.3 Community and household scope  
This paper analyses resilience at the household (micro) and community (meso) level 
because each represents an important but distinct aspect of rural resilience (Jones & 
Tanner, 2017; Quandt, 2018; Thiede, 2016 ).  Both are conceptualised as systems  but they 
are distin guished  on the basis of their boundaries: a household consists of a household 
head, members and their resources – a co-residential group with associated domestic 
functions ( Bender, 1967 ); whereas, a community5 consists of many households, resources, 
and co mmunity -level ins titutions, such as local governance , religious institutions , health 
facilities , among others.   Evidence of impact on individual farmer livelihoods and individual 
households will be categorised under household resilience; evidence of impact  on whole 
                                                      
5 Recognising other forms of communities (e.g. of practice, of interest (Robert et al. , 2015)), here the focus is 
on place -based communities – ones that are geographically bound (Wilson, 2012).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
11 
 communities or community -level institutions / sub -systems (village, community bank, 
farmer cooperative society, etc.) will be categorised under community resilience.  Evidence 
on community -level resilience must relate to a whole community or comm unity -level 
institution / sub -system as a unit; it will not merely be evidence of impact on an aggregate 
of multiple households.  Having said this, of course, the effect and connectedness of 
household resilience to community resilience will be considered.  
 
B2.4  ICTs and community and household resilience  
Given that communities and households are understood as livelihood systems, it is 
important to establish how  ICTs relate to such systems  – i.e. whether ICTs are inside or 
outside the livelihood system – whe n analysing ICTs’ influence on their resilience .  From the 
RABIT framework perspective, ICTs are considered as part of the system components, 
whereby they interact and influence other components ( e.g. assets, institutions) and the 
system properties – its resilience (see Figure B3) (Ospina & Heeks, 2010) .  Therefore, to 
understand the contribution of ICTs to system resilience, one can analyse the impact  of ICTs 
on each sub -property of resilience ( Ospina & Heeks, 2010; 2015) .  This is operationalised  by 
evaluating the contribution of ICTs against specific characteristics – “markers” or 
“indicators” – of each resilienc e sub -property  (see Table B 4) (Ospina & Heeks,  2015; 2019) .  
For example, to analyse the contribution of ICTs to system robustness, thre e key markers 
are considered: physical preparedness, institutional capacity, and loose functional coupling .  
For agriculture, this could involve evaluating how ICTs are helping household/communities 
prepare for heavy rain for the case of physical preparedn ess, or how ICTs are enhancing 
operation and interaction of agricultural communit y/household institu tions, such as 
community governance bodies , for the case of institutional capacity .  It is through this link 
that ICTs are influencing the resilience and ad aptive capacities of households and 
communities ( Ospina & Heeks, 2010); and thus, it was the foundation of the analysis 
presented in the following section . 
 
 
Figure B3: Livelihood system with ICTs as system components .  Source: Ospina (2013)  
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
12 
 Table B4: Resilience sub -propert y indicators .  Source: Heeks & Ospina (2019)  
Resilience  
Attributes  Key Markers/  Indicators   
FOUNDATIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF HOUSEHOLD/ COMMUNITY RESILIENCE  
Robustness   Physical preparedness  
 Institutional capacity  
 Loose functional coupling  
Self-
Organisation   Collaboration and consensus -building  
 Social networks and trust  
 Local leadership  
Learning   Capacity building  
 Reflective thinking  
 New and traditional knowledge  
ENABLING ATTRIBUTES OF HOUSEHOLD/ COMMUNITY RESILIENCE  
Redundancy   Resource spareness  
 Resource substitutability  
 Functional overlaps  
Rapidity   Rapid issue detection  
 Rapid issue assessmen t 
 Rapid issue response  
Scale   Scale of resource access  
 Multi -level networks  
 Intra -level networks  
Diversity & 
Flexibility   Variety of courses of action  
 Adaptable decision -making  
 Innovation mechanism  
Equality   Equality of distribution of assets  
 Inclusiveness and participation  
 Openness and accountability  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
13 
 C. Findings: ICT4Ag, Community and  Household Resilienc e 
 
Addressing the first research objective, t his section  is structured into three  sub-sections: the 
first presents findings associated with ICT4Ag strengthening each resilience attribute; 
followed by evidence of weakening .  The final sub-section summarises the overall i mpact on 
household and community resilience attributes.   A small amount of evidence was 
challenging to fit into the existing attributes / markers – we discuss this in Section E4. 
 
C1. ICT4Ag Strengthening Resilience Attrib utes  
This sub-section presents evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening each RABIT resilience attribute .  
It will start by reporting evidence of foundational attributes then followed by enabling 
attributes .  For each attribute , evidence of both household and community will be 
presented and summ arised.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
14 
 C1.1 ICT4Ag and learning  
 
A. Household  
Regarding learning at household level, 62% of sources (see Figure C1) reported evidence of 
ICTs strengthening new and traditional knowledge , by facilitating access to and use of 
agricultural knowledge (e.g. farming techniques, pest management, livestock -keeping 
techniques), climate change -related knowledge (e.g. climate change influence on 
agricultural activities), and market -related knowledge (e.g. price and market demand 
variations per season).  There was a lso evidence of ICTs improving access to information 
that, when accumulated over a period, can be perceived as knowledge (e.g. price 
information creating price trend knowledge over time).  
 
18% of sources gave evidence of ICTs building capacity  to learn, ei ther directly by 
eliminating obstacles that limit learning (e.g. through the provision of audio -based 
agricultural knowledge, illiterate farmers can learn through listening (Baardewijk, 2017)), or 
indirectly by improving skills related to the use of new IC Ts, which then facilitate acquisition 
of new knowledge (e.g. farmers using mobile phone and internet to access new learning 
opportunities (Manfre & Nordehn, 2013; Ogbeide & Ele, 2015)).  
 
As regards reflective thinking , only one of the sources was relevant:  reporting evidence of 
ICTs facilitating identification of gaps and solutions related to pest management (Dey et al. , 
2008).  
 
Overall, 69% of sources presented evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household learning, 
given a few sources gave evidence relating to multiple learning markers.  
 
 
Figure C1: ICT4Ag household learning markers contribution  
  62%
18%
2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
New and traditional knowledge Capacity building Reflective thinking% of evidence occurance
Learning markersHousehold learning strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
15 
 B. Community  
Regarding learning at community level, 11% of sources (see Figure C2) reported evidence of 
ICTs facilitating the sharing and use of new and traditional k nowledge , particularly 
agricultural production knowledge, among farmers’ groups through established networks.  
Concerning capacity building , one of the sources reported ICTs being used to improve 
community -level groups’ learning opportunities, especially a fter the skills of using online 
learning platforms were acquired (Lwoga, 2010).  There was no evidence on the reflective 
thinking  marker.  
 
Overall, 11% of sources gave evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening community learning, as one 
source gave evidence on the two learning markers.  
 
 
Figure C2: ICT4Ag community learning markers contribution  
 
  11%
2%0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
New and traditional knowledge Capacity building Reflective thinking% of evidence occurance
Learning resilience markersCommunity learning strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
16 
 C1.2  ICT4Ag and robustness  
 
A. Household  
A third (33%) of sources  (see Figure C3 ) provided evidence of ICTs enabling households to 
continue to function amid changes and uncertainty – institutional capacity  – by expanding 
livelihood strategies ( e.g. supporting off -farm activities, agricultural commercialisation (Kirui 
et al. , 2013)), an d by increasing agricultural production capacities (in terms of quality, 
quantity, and diversity), mainly through adoption of improved farming techniques and 
higher investment in agricultural inputs.  
 
Approximately one -fifth (22%) of sources suggested that  ICTs are improving defensive  
physical preparedness  by providing climate -related information that enables farming 
households to change their planting patterns, irrigation scheduling, and agricultural inputs 
(e.g. short -duration seeds), and fishermen to pre pare against risks associated with fishing 
activities ( e.g. postponing fishing activities upon receiving alerts of a gathering storm (Mittal 
et al. , 2010; Salia et al. , 2011)) .  There was also evidence of agro -pastoralist households 
using ICTs ( e.g. mobile  phones) to prepare against wild animals’ attacks (Baird & Hartter, 
2017), and some farming households taking advantage of price information to prepare 
against food deficit by buying more food when prices are low (Zanello, 2012).  
 
There were only two sourc es that provided evidence of ICTs strengthening loose functional 
coupling ; that is, enabling farming households to be less dependent on other households, 
particularly as sources of agricultural information and credits/loans.   Overall, around half 
(53%) of sources provided evidence of ICT4Ag contributing to household robustness . 
 
 
Figure C3: ICT4Ag household robustness markers contribution  
  33%
22%
4%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Institutional capacity Physical preparedness Loose functional coupling% of sources with evidence
Robustness markersHousehold robustness strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
17 
 B. Community  
At the community level, 9% of sources (see Figure C4) gave evidence of ICTs strengthening 
the ability of community -level bodies to continue to function (as a unit) amid change and 
uncertainty – institutional capacity  – by improving their accessibility and reach capacity ( e.g. 
by providing service s through t he internet and mobile phones), as well as their 
responsiveness ( e.g. responsiveness of pastoralist  “community warriors ” (Lewis et al. , 2016)) 
and internal management ( e.g. management of farmers’ group loan payments (Martin & 
Abbott, 2011)) .  No evidence w as found relating to loose functional coupling  and physical 
preparedness  at community level . 
 
 
Figure C4: ICT4Ag community robustness markers contribution  
  9%
0% 0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Institutional capacity Loose functional coupling Physical preparedness% of evidence occurance
Robustness markersCommunity robustness strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
18 
 C1.3  ICT4Ag and self -organisation  
 
A. Household  
Looking at self -organisation within households, 22% of sources  (see Figure C 5) provided 
evidence of ICTs building and maintaining social networks and trust  within households, as 
they strengthen bonds and trust among household members.  
 
7% of sources gave evidence of ICTs enabling local leadership  within households, particularly 
when used by households’ heads to coordinate agricultural activities and provide guidance 
and directions during emergencies ( e.g. when a household member is sick (Furuholt & 
Matotay, 2011 ; Matuha, 2015 )). 
 
In the case of collaboration and consensus -building , only two sources provided evidence of 
ICTs facilitating the building of consensus within households on agricultural activities ( e.g. 
agreeing on farming techniques (Mittal, 2015)) and on emergencies ( e.g. when chasing cr op-
raiding animals (Lewis et al. , 2016)).  
 
In summary, 27% of sources provided evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household self -
organisation.  
 
 
Figure C5: ICT4Ag household self -organisation markers contribution  
  22%
7%4%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Social networks and trust Local leadership Collaboration and 
consensus‐building% of evidence occurance
Self-organisation markersHousehold self -organisation strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
19 
 B. Community  
At community scope, 20% of source s (see Figure C6 ) presented evidence of ICTs 
strengthening social network s and trust , by facilitating establishment and maintenance of 
community -level networks, particularly those related to farming and trading.  
 
18% of sources reported evidence of ICTs su pporting collaboration and consensus -building  
of community -level group farming activities ( e.g. groups of farmers collaborating when 
negotiating tractor prices (Furuholt & Matotay, 2011)), and facilitating coordination and 
management of community -level bod ies (e.g. organising and coordinating meetings of 
farmers’ cooperatives (Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013; Krone et al. , 2016)).  
 
13% of sources gave evidence of ICTs strengthening local leadership  at the community level 
(e.g. farmer cooperation associations), particularly when used by their leaders to organise 
and manage the body and its associated activities.  
 
In summary, 38% of sources reported evidence of ICT4Ag strengthen ing community self -
organisation . 
 
 
Figure C6: ICT4Ag c ommunity self -organisation marke rs contribution  
  20%18%
13%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Social networks and trust Collaboration and 
consensus‐buildingLocal leadership% of evidence occurance
Self-organisation markersCommunity self -organisation strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
20 
 C1.4 ICT4Ag and redundancy  
 
A. Household  
As regards redundancy at household level , almost three -quarters (73%) of sources (see 
Figure C7) presented evidence of ICTs strengthening resource spareness , primarily by 
reducing the costs and time associated with agricultural activities ( e.g. reducing costs and 
time associated with journeys, information search (Arinloye et al. , 2015; Cole & Fernando, 
2012)), and by increasing household income ( e.g. through improved productivity, better 
prices, and i ncreased savings and remittances (Munyegera & Matsumoto, 2016; Mwakaje, 
2010)).  
 
Just over a third (36%) of sources gave evidence of ICTs strengthening functional overlaps ; 
that is, ICTs offering similar functionality to existing systems/resources .  ICTs were achieving 
this by complementing other sources of agricultural information ( e.g. advisory system s, print 
media (Cole & Fernando, 2012)), by providing an alternative way of transferring and 
conducting payments ( e.g. through mobile money (Sekabira & Qaim , 2017a)), or of  storing 
crucial information ( e.g. through mobile phone  memory card s (Martin & Abbott, 2011)), and 
by providing alternative ways of accessing certain services ( e.g. mobile phone radio, and 
accessing  the internet through mobile phones (Manfr e & Nordehn, 2013)).  
 
With respect to resource substitutability , 20% of sources reported evidence of ICTs used to 
substitute sources of agricultural information ( e.g. from intermediaries  and buyers to ICT -
based systems), journeys ( e.g. by making a phone ca ll instead), and sources of loans ( e.g. 
from close relatives/friends to ICT -based loan -offering services (Batista & Vicente, 2017)).  
 
In summary, the evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household redundancy was  found in 37 
of the 45 sources . 
 
 
Figure C7: ICT 4Ag household redundancy markers contribution  73%
36%
20%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Resource spareness Functional overlaps Resource substitutability% of evidence occurance
Redundancy markersHousehold redundancy strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
21 
 B. Community  
Regarding redundancy at community level , 9% of sources (see Figure C8) provided evidence 
of ICTs facilitating functional overlap , particularly by enabling community -level bodies ( e.g. 
community agricu ltural radio station s) to provide parallel systems that offer ed agricultural 
information, partly by supporting redundant channels ( e.g. internet and mobile -based 
(Ajwang, 2014)), and partly by complementing other traditional sources ( e.g. 
advisory /extension  services) .  Other related data shows that farmers’ groups are also using 
mobile money -based payment as an alternative to cash -based payment (Dannenberg & 
Lakes, 2013).  
 
In only two of the sources was there evidence of ICTs strengthening resource  spareness  at 
community level, specifically by facilitating collaborations that resulted in reduced costs 
associated with agricultural inputs ( e.g. hiring tractors (Furuholt & Matotay, 2011)), and 
improved income attributed to (group) bulk marketing (Masuk i et al. , 2010).  
 
Concerning resource substitutability , only one of the sources provided evidence of a 
community -level body using ICTs to substitute sources of information (using the internet 
instead of its internal library (Lwoga, 2010)).  
 
In summary, 13%  of sources presented evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening community 
redundancy.  
 
 
Figure C8: ICT4Ag community redundancy markers contribution  
C1.5 ICT4Ag  and diversity & flexibility  
 
A. Household  
In the case of diversity & flexibility  at household level , just over half (56%) of sources (see 
Figure C9) presented evidence of ICTs strengthening adaptable decision making , especially 
by facilitating better decision making in relation to agricultural production ( e.g. decisions on 
the type of inputs to use, the  time of planting, the type of crops to plants), and marketing 
(e.g. amount of crops to harvests, where to sell, and what price to sell at).  9%4%2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Functional overlaps Resource spareness Resource substitutability% of evidence occurance
Redundancy markersCommunity redundancy strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
22 
  
Approximately half (53%) of sources gave evidence of ICTs strengthening households’ ability 
to take a variety of courses of actions  in response to challenges and opportunities, especially 
by enhancing flexibility in agricultural production ( e.g. by promoting the cultivation of 
diverse crops and the adoption of new and superior farming techniques (Baumüller, 2015; 
Man fre & Nordehn, 2013)), by supporting diverse source s of income ( e.g. promoting 
commercial farming, increasing off -farm income, facilitating savings and remittances (Kirui 
et al. , 2013; Sekabira & Qaim, 2017a)), and by increasing market flexibility ( e.g. selling to 
multiple different  markets).  
 
9% of sources reported evidence of ICTs strengthening innovation mechanisms ; in other 
words, ways through which household s access innovative ideas, partly by enabling 
linkages/networks which then serve as sources of i nnovative ideas ( e.g. farmers through 
links with banks had access to innovative ideas about international farming quality 
standards (Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013)), and partly as direct channels through which 
households access innovative ideas ( e.g. through mo bile push -based systems farmers were 
acquiring more innovative ideas (Baardewijk, 2017)).  
 
In summary, evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household diversity & flexibility  was 
presented by 32 out of the 45 sources.  
 
 
Figure C9: ICT4Ag h ousehold diversity & flexibility  markers contribution  
  56%53%
9%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Adaptable decision-
makingVariety of courses of
actionInnovation mechanism% of evidence occurance
Diversity & flexibility markersHousehold diversity & flexibility strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
23 
 B. Community  
At community scope, only two of the sources (see Figure C10) provided evidence of ICTs 
strengthening the ability of community -level bodies to make  better decisions , particularly by 
increasing the speed of sharin g information ( e.g. by increasing the speed of sharing 
information about health diagnosis (Martin & Abbott, 2011)) and by improving accessibility 
of information ( e.g. village -level market information (Tadesse & Bahiigwa, 2015)).  
 
Similarly, there were just two sources that provided evidence of ICTs enabling community -
level bodies to take new courses of actions  when responding to challenges and 
opportunities .  For example, due to informatio n obtained through ICTs, farmer  groups 
started using group loan shari ng and group savings to improve their financial capital 
(Piontak, 2012).  
 
There was no evidence found of ICTs strengthening  innovation mechanisms  at the 
community level.  
 
Overall, only three  of the sources gave evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening community 
diversity & flexibility . 
 
 
Figure C10: ICT4Ag community diversity & flexibility  markers contribution  
  4% 4%
0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Adaptable decision-making Variety of courses of action Innovation mechanism% of evidence occurance
Diversity & flexibility markersCommunity diversity & flexibility strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
24 
 C1.6 ICT4Ag and rapidity  
 
A. Household  
With respect to rapidity at household level , nearly half ( 47% ) of sources (see Figure C11) 
reported evidence of ICTs strengthening rapid issue response , particularly by increasing the 
speed at which household members respond during agricultural activities ( e.g. input 
mobilisation, livestock emergency care provision, pest outbreak management), an d market -
related activities ( e.g. searching for buyers, selling produce, mobilising suppliers and 
buyers).  
 
Just above a third (36%) of sources provided evidence of ICTs strengthening household rapid 
issue  detection , primarily by increasing the speed at wh ich household members access 
agricultural information ( e.g. availability of inputs, farming best practices, weather 
information), and market information ( e.g. market price information, market demands).  
 
Only two sources gave evidence of ICTs facilitating h ousehold rapid issue assessment , mainly 
by enhancing the speed at which households make market -related decisions ( e.g. changing 
produce prices, changing buyers (Ajwang, 2014; Mwantimwa, 2019)).  
 
Taken together, 58% of sources gave evidence of ICT4Ag streng thening household rapidity.  
 
 
Figure C11: ICT4Ag household rapidity markers contribution  
  47%
36%
4%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Rapid issue response Rapid issue detection Rapid issue assessment% of evidence occurance
Rapidity markersHousehold rapidity strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
25 
 B. Community  
At community level , 7% of sources  (see Figure C12)  reported evidence of ICTs improving 
community rapid issue response , particularly by enhancing the speed  of mobilisation of 
community -level bodies when responding to agricultural emergencies ( e.g. when dealing 
with wild animals (Lewis et al. , 2016), managing livestock disease outbreak (Masuki et al. , 
2010)) and during community engagements ( e.g. community me etings, trainings (Piontak, 
2012)).  
 
Only one source  provided evidence of ICTs improving rapid issue detection  at a community 
level, particularly time -sensitive issue s (e.g. disease outbreaks (Martin & Abbott, 2011)), as 
the speed of sharing information among community -level bodies is enhanced.  
 
There was no evidence of ICTs strengthening rapid issue assessment  at the community level.  
 
In summary, 9% of sources provided evidence of ICT4Ag s trengthening community rapidity . 
 
 
Figure C12: ICT4Ag community rapidity markers contribution  
  7%
2%0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Rapid issue response Rapid issue detection Rapid issue assessment% of the evidence occurance
Rapidity markersCommunity rapidity strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
26 
 C1.7 ICT4Ag and equality  
 
A. Household  
Looking at household equality, 36% of sources (see Figure C13) reported evidence of ICTs 
strengthening inclusiveness and participation  of households and their members,  but only in 
relation to external not internal functions.  This was  particularly by improving access to 
markets ( e.g. by connecting with buyers) and acquisition of new agricultural knowledge ( e.g. 
best practices, climate change implications) .  There was also  evidence of ICTs increasing 
bargaining power ( e.g. through knowledge of market price), and improving ownership, 
access, and use of ICTs and ICT -based services ( e.g. ownership and use of mobile phones, 
use of mobile money services).  
 
Only one source  report ed evidence of ICTs improving the distribution of assets  within 
households, whereby a notable increase in ownership of productive assets was observed 
among women with mobile phone s (Sekabira & Qaim, 2017b) . 
 
There was no evidence of ICTs strengthening openness and accountability  at the household 
level.  
 
Collectively, 36% of sources reported evidence of ICT4Ag s trengthening household equality . 
 
 
Figure C13: ICT4Ag household equality markers contribution  
  36%
2%0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Inclusiveness and participation Equality of distribution of assets Openness and accountability% of evidence occurance
Equality markersHousehold equality strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
27 
 B. Community  
Regarding equality at community level , 11% of sources  (see Figure C14)  gave evidence of 
ICTs improving inclusiveness and participation of marginalised groups within communities, 
particularly by facilitating acquisition of agricultural knowledge among underprivileged 
groups ( e.g. women), by pro moting financial inclusion of remote areas ( e.g. through the 
expansion of mobile money (Mtega & Msungu, 2013)), and by connecting marginalised 
villages to markets ( e.g. through network coverage expansion (Muto & Yamano, 2009)).  
 
There was only one source that gave evidence of ICTs improving equality of distribution of 
assets ; specifically, the more -equal distribution of profits, obtained from agricultural sales, 
between  community groups ( e.g. farmers and intermediaries), as market  prices become 
more open (Furuholt & Matotay, 2011).  
 
Similarly, only one of the sources presented evidence of ICTs promoting accountability and 
openness  among farmer  groups; when integrated into group meetings to facilitate the 
sharing of information .  For example, a mobile phone speaker was being used during group 
meetings so that all members could  hear the information being provided (Martin & Abbott, 
2011).  
 
Overall, 16% of sources provided evidence of ICT4Ag improving community equality . 
 
 
Figure C14: ICT4Ag community equality markers contribution  
  11%
2% 2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Inclusiveness and participation Equality of distribution of assets Openness and accountability% of evidence occurance
Equality markersCommunity equality strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
28 
 C1.8 ICT4Ag and scale  
 
A. Household  
As regards scale at household level , just over half (56%) of sources  (see Figure C15)  gave 
evidence of ICTs strengthening scale of resource access , mainly by improving hous eholds’ 
access to a wide range of markets and sources of market information ( e.g. customers from 
other regions, diverse sources of market prices and demands information), and by 
enhancing access to a variety of sources of agricultural information ( e.g. from mobile -based 
platforms, radio, extension services) and agricultural inputs ( e.g. accessing pesticides and 
fertiliser from a wide range of suppliers (Furuholt & Matotay, 2011; Martin & Abbott, 
2011)).  
 
18% of sources presented evidence of ICTs strengtheni ng multi -level networks , particularly 
by facilitating the building of networks/linkages with buyers, suppliers and traders who are 
outside the immediate community, either through formal contracts ( e.g. through contract 
farming  platform s (Baumüller, 2015)) or through non -formal means ( e.g. through mobile -
based communication linkage (Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013; Krone et al. , 2016)).  
 
11% of sources provided evidence of ICTs strengthening intra -level networks , specifically by 
facilitating the establishment of ne tworks with buyers, suppliers and community -level 
bodies found within their immediate community.  
 
In summary, 60% of sources gave evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household scale.  
 
 
Figure C15: ICT4Ag household scale markers contribution  
  56%
18%
11%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Scale of resource access Multilevel networks Intra‐level networks% of evidence occurance
Scale markersHousehold scale strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
29 
 B. Community  
Regarding scale at community scope, 9% of sources (see Figure C16) reported evidence of 
ICTs facilitating scale of resource access , particularly by improving the flow of information 
and resources among community -level bodies during emergencies ( e.g. livest ock disease 
outbreak (Masuki et al. , 2010), wildlife attacks (Lewis et al. , 2016)), and by enabling 
community -level bodies ( e.g. community radio (Lwoga, 2010)) to access agricultural 
knowledge/information from a diverse range of sources ( e.g. internet, oth er international 
radio stations).  
 
7% of sources gave evidence of ICTs strengthening multi -level  networks , particularly by 
facilitating the creation of networks between community -level bodies ( e.g. farmer groups, 
village cooperation (Dannenberg & Lakes, 20 13; Lwoga, 2010)) and exporters/buyers who 
are outside the immediate community; thus, serving as alternative sources of markets.  
 
There was only one source that reported evidence of ICTs contributing to intra -level 
networks , specifically by enabling the es tablishment of links between local  community  
representatives and groups of farmers in remote areas (Mittal et al. , 2010); thus, enabling 
community  services to reach more people.  
 
Overall, 16% of sources presented evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening community scale.  
 
 
Figure C16: ICT4Ag community scale markers contribution  
  9%7%
2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Scale of resource access Multilevel networks Intra-level networks% of evidence occurance
Scale markersCommunity scale strength
StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
30 
 C2. ICT4Ag Weakening Resilience Attrib utes  
Having looked at the evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening resilience, this sub-section moves on 
to present  findings of weak ening .  Overall, there was  evidence of ICTs weakening resilience 
in seven out of the eight attributes (combining both household and community) : there was 
no evidence of ICTs weakening rapidity .  Out of those, five attributes  had fewer than three 
sources giving evidence of weakness:  scale, one source; learning, one source; self -
organisation, one source; diversity & flexibility , one source; and robustness, two sources .  
Evidence for these five attributes will not be presented further; evidence of the remaining 
two is presented below.  
 
C2.1 ICT4Ag and equality  
 
A. Household  
Regarding equality at household level , two of the sources (see Figure C17) presented 
evidence of ICTs weakening inclusiveness and participation , primarily when reinforcing 
existing social structures, where men tend to h ave more access to  ICTs, and gain more 
knowledge than women (Fu & Akter, 2016; Piontak, 2012) .  Two other sources gave 
evidence of ICTs weakening equality of distribution of assets , particularly when it comes to 
ownership of ICTs ( e.g. mobile phones), wher e a dramatic gap exists between men and 
women within households (Baardewijk, 2017) .  One of the sources gave evidence of ICTs 
weakening openness and accountability , specifically when used to facilitate lies and 
deception in social and agricultural activiti es (e.g. lies about the availability of water) and 
even infidelity within households (Baird & Hartter, 2017) .  Overall, 11% of sources reported 
evidence of ICT4Ag weakening hous ehold equality . 
 
 
Figure C17: ICT4Ag household equality markers weakness contribution  
  4% 4%2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Equality of distribution of assets Inclusiveness and participation Openness and accountability% of evidence occurance
Equality markersHousehold equality weakness
WeaknessManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
31 
 B. Community  
16% of sources (see Figure C18) provided evidence of ICTs weakening equality at community 
level , specifically inclusiveness and participation , as men, the rich, and the educated tend ed 
to use ICTs and benefit more than their counterparts .  Related data shows that farmers who 
lack ownership and use of ICTs tend to be disconnected from the market; hence, further 
reducing their participation and bargaining position (Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013; Krone et 
al., 2016).  
 
 
Figure C18: ICT4Ag community equality markers weakness contribution  
  16%
0% 0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Inclusiveness and participation Equality of distribution of assets Openness and accountability% of evidence occurance
Equality markersCommunity equality weakness
WeaknessManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
32 
 C2.2 ICT4Ag and household redundancy  
 
Overall , 11% of sources (see Figure C19) reported evidence of ICTs weakening redundancy at 
household level , with all the evidence related to resource spareness , particularly because 
there is a cost implication associated with purchasing, using, and maintaining ICTs ( e.g. 
purchasing mobile phone credit, charging mobile phones, repairing ICTs, etc.). 
 
 
Figure C19: ICT4Ag household redundancy markers weakness contribution  
 
C3. Household and Community Resilience Attributes Su mmary  
This sub-section presents an overview of the findings for household, followed by 
community, and then a comparison between household and community scope.  
 
C3.1 Household resilience attr ibutes summary  
In order to obtain an overall score of the contribution of ICT4Ag to each of the ho usehold 
resilience attributes, the  proportion of unique sources that provided evidence of strength or 
weakness of at least one marker for each resilience attr ibute was used .  This approach6 was 
taken because the markers in the RABIT framework are illustrative rather than 
comprehensive, and so this approach was seen as a good reflection of the extent to which 
ICT4Ag initiatives are impacting each of the resilien ce attributes .  This approach is also less 
influenced by some of the operationalisation challenges encountered (see  Section s E4 and 
E5), especially the categorisation of evidence among different markers of the same 
attribute.  
 
                                                      
6 Alternative approaches were calculated based on different formulations – for example, individually averaging 
percentage of sources mentioning markers of an attribute, or excludi ng marker categories that were not 
evidenced from calculations  – but they do not make much difference to the final shape of the findings.  11%
0% 0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
Resource spareness Functional overlaps Resource substitutability% of evidence occurance
Redundancy markersHousehold redundancy weakness
WeaknessManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
33 
 To get a resilience score for each attribute, first, the percentage of aggregate resilience 
scores for weakness and strength were computed, and then aggregate weakness was 
subtracted from aggregate strength to get the relative resilience attribute score as  shown in 
Table C1 (see Appendix B  for more details of each article).  
 
Table C1: Household resilience attributes score summary  
Resilience 
attribute  Resilience markers  % 
markers 
weakness  % 
markers 
strength  % attribute 
aggregate 
weakness  % attribute 
aggregate 
strength  Resilience 
attribute 
score  
Diversity & 
Flexibility  Adaptable decision -making    56%  
  71%  71%  Innovation mechanism    9% 
Variety of courses of action    53%  
Redundancy  Functional overlaps    36%  
11%  82%  71%  Resource spareness  11%  73%  
Resource substitutability    20%  
Learning  Capacity building    18%  
2% 69%  67%  New and traditional knowledge  2% 62%  
Reflective thinking    2% 
Scale  Intra‐level networks    11%  
  60%  60%  Multi -level  networks    18%  
Scale of resource access    56%  
Rapidity  Rapid issue assessment    4% 
  58%  58%  Rapid issue detection    36%  
Rapid issue response    47%  
Robustness  Institutional capacity    33%  
  53%  53%  Loose functional coupling    4% 
Physical preparedness    22%  
Self-
Organis ation  Collaboration and consensus‐
building    4% 
2% 27%  24%  Local leadership    7% 
Social networks and trust  2% 22%  
Equality  Equality of distribution of assets  4% 2% 
11%  36%  24%  Inclusiveness and participation  4% 36%  
Openness  and accountability  2%   
 
Based on Table C1 (see also Figure C20), at the household level , the  evidence on  use of ICT s-
in-agric ulture suggests three categories of resilience impact, whether considering just 
strengthening, or a combined score that integrates both strengthening and weakening.  
Three attributes  – household redundancy, diversity & flexibility , and learning – are 
stren gthened most.  Three attributes – household scale, rapidity and robustness – are 
strengthened somewhat.  Two attributes – household self -organisation and equality – are 
not evidenced as being strengthened very much.  
 
The literature evidence base on ICT4Ag initiatives suggests only a small impact in weakening 
household resilience; reflected most in terms of household equality and redundancy, and Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
34 
 very slightly in relation to self -organisation and learning.  H owever, overall, the reported 
evidence suggests tha t ICT4Ag interventions are strengthening the resilience attributes of 
rural households far more than weakening them.  
 
 
Figure C20: ICT4Ag household resilience attributes summary  
  -11%-2%
-11%-2%82%
71% 69%
60% 58%53%
36%
27%
-20%-10%0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%% of sources with evidence
Resilience attributesHousehold resilience attributes summary
Weakness StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
35 
 C3.2 Community resilience attributes summary  
The computation of community -level resilience attribute scores to ok a similar approach to 
that for  household -level resilience attributes scores, as summarised in Table C2. 
 
Table C2: Community resilience attributes score summary  
Resilience 
attribute  Resilience markers  % 
mark ers 
weakness  % 
markers 
strength  % attribute 
aggregate 
weakness  % attribute 
aggregate 
strength  Resilience 
attribute 
score  
Self-
Organis ation  Collaboration and consensus‐
building  2% 18%  
2% 38%  36%  Local leadership    13%  
Social networks and trust    20%  
Redundancy  Functional overlaps    9% 
  13%  13%  Resource spareness    4% 
Resource substitutability    2% 
Scale  Intra‐level networks    2% 
2% 16%  13%  Multi -level  networks    7% 
Scale of resource access  2% 9% 
Learning  Capacity building    2% 
  11%  11%  New and traditional knowledge    11%  
Reflective thinking      
Rapidity  Rapid issue assessment      
  9% 9% Rapid issue detection    2% 
Rapid issue response    7% 
Diversity & 
Flexibility  Adaptable decision -making    4% 
2% 7% 4% Innovation mechanism      
Variety of courses of action  2% 4% 
Robustness  Institutional capacity  4% 9% 
4% 9% 4% Loose functional coupling      
Physical preparedness      
Equality  Equality of distribution of assets    2% 
16%  16%  0% Inclusiveness and participation  16%  11%  
Openness and accountability    2% 
 
On aggregate, looking at Table C2 (see also Figure C21), the literature evidence suggests the 
resilience impact of ICT s-in-agric ulture is towards community self -organisation far more 
than any other attribute.  The much smaller prevalence of community -level evidence 
compared to household -level evidence means a greater difference between integrated and 
strengthening -only scores.  One  might separate out a slightly greater resilience impact on 
community redundancy, scale, learning and equality; and a slightly lesser resilience impact 
on community rapidity, diversity & flexibility , and robustness.  But the differences between 
these seven  is too small to draw any strong conclusions.  
 
Similarly , in relation to the weakening of community resilience by ICT s-in-agric ulture 
appears somewhat in relation to equality.  Evidence of weakening of the other four Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
36 
 identified attributes – robustness, sel f-organisation, scale, and diversity & flexibility  – is so 
limited as to be barely worthy of note; relying as it does on the evidence of just one or at 
most two sources.  Overall, bar equality, our re -analysis of published research suggests 
ICT4Ag interven tions strengthen community resilience attributes more than weakening 
them.  
 
 
Figure C21: ICT4Ag community resilience attributes summary  
  -2% -2%
-16%-4%-2%38%
16% 16%13%11%9% 9%7%
-30%-20%-10%0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%% of sources with evidence
Resilience attributesCommunity resilience attributes summary
Weakness StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
37 
 C3.3 Comparison of community and household resilience attributes summary  
Looking at the attribute aggregate strength columns in Table C1 and Table C2, there is much 
more reported evidence of ICT4Ag strengthening household resilience attributes than 
community resilience attributes, save only for the  self-organisation attribute ( see Figure 
C22).  As can be seen from Figure C22, there is no overlap between the leading 
strengthened household resilience attributes – redundancy, diversity & flexibility , and 
learning; and the leading strengthened community resilience attribute – self-organisation, 
with scale and equality some way behind.  Overall, there is little to clearly differentiate the 
foundational resilience attributes (robustness, self -organisation, learning) from the other, 
enabling attributes.  
 
 
Figure C22: Household and community resilience attributes strength comparison  
Findings  on resilience weakening are  much more limited (see Figure C23).  There is only any 
real evidence base of ICT s-in-agric ulture weakening  equality, with some evidence of 
household redundancy being weakened.  Other attributes are mentioned, some for 
households, some for community but as noted above, the evidence base is so small that one 
cannot really draw conclusions.  
 82%
71%69%
60%58%
53%
36%
27%
13%
7%11%16%
9% 9%16%38%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%% of sources with evidence
Resilience attributesHousehold and community resilience attributes strength
Household Strength Community StrengthManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
38 
  
Figure C23: Househo ld and community resilience attributes weakness comparison  
 
  11% 11%
2% 2%16%
2% 2%4%2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%No. of sources with evidence
Resilience attributesHousehold and community resilience attributes weakness
Household weakness Community weaknessManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
39 
 D. Analysis : Explaining ICTs’ Impact on Rural Resilience  
 
Addressing the second research objective, t his section provides further  analysis and  
discussion of the findings  with a new inductive con ceptualisation to summarise why the 
observed resilience impacts are  seen.  
 
D1. ICT4Ag and  Resilience of Rural House holds  
As argued in Section C 3.1, the reported evidence suggests three levels of contribution that 
ICT4Ag makes to rural household resilience: a relatively low contribution to self -organisation 
and equality; a medium -high contribution to scale, rapidity and robustness; and a high 
contr ibution to redundancy, diversity & flexibility , and learning.  Each will be discussed in 
turn.  
 
D1.1 Relatively Low ICT4Ag Contribution: Self -Organisation and Equality  
One possible explanation for the low contribution of ICT4Ag initiatives to household self-
organisation and equality is the design and implementation of ICT4Ag projects, where 
relatively little focus has been given to these development outcomes  (Heeks, 2014b; 
Walsham, 2017) .  For example, in only three ( Manfre & Nordehn, 2013; Mittal, 2015;  
Sekabira & Qaim, 2017b ) out of the 45 sources, was there a central theme for ICT s-in-
agric ulture initiatives around equality and empowerment, and none on self -organisation.  
 
Another possibility is the difficulty in strengthening these attributes, mainly because they 
often require associated parallel changes, such as changes in social and power structures, 
institutions, and resources ( Ali & Kumar, 2011 ; Fu & Akter, 2016 ; Mittal, 2015 ).  Yet ICTs’ 
adoption, use and impact tend to be shaped  by the existing i nstitutions and structural 
relations, rather than the opposite ( Heeks, 2018; Zheng et al. , 2018 ).  We saw this most 
strongly in relation to equality.  There were positive signs that ICT4Ag can contribute to 
equality, particularly on the “inclusiveness and participation” marker, with marginalised 
households and members (e.g. women) having benefitted despite being late adopters 
(Kikulwe et al. , 2014; Martin & Abbott, 2011 ).  However, the structural – particularly gender  
– inequalities that are dominant in rur al areas of many developing countries, and the 
tendency for reproduction of social structures during technolo gical change  make it hard for 
ICTs to make a difference ( Kanbur & Venables, 2005).  Hence, evidence of ICT4Ag weakening 
equality: reproducing and e ven reinforcing inequalities within households, as men tend to 
own, use, and benefit more from ICTs than women ( Baardewijk, 2017; Fu & Akter, 2016; 
Loudon, 2016 ). 
 
Regarding self -organisation, the evidence suggests that ICTs’ contribution towards 
maintaining the social networks, trust or collaborative decision -making of household 
members occurs when those household members are in different geographical locations 
(Matuha, 2015; Salia et al. , 2011 ; Shaffril et al. , 2015 ).  But, for most rural households, face -
to-face interactions will be by far the dominant means of  interaction and of s elf-
organisation, in which case  ICTs have little role to play ( Baird & Hartter, 2017 ; Molony, 2006; 
2008 ).  ICTs’ intra -household role will also be limited because, at least until recently, 
ownership was typically  limited to one device per household.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
40 
 D1.2 Medium -High ICT4Ag Contribution: Scale, Rapidity, and Robus tness  
For these attributes , there is some evidence of ICT4Ag initiatives making improvements  
where interventions have focused on improving access to markets ( e.g. Ajwang, 2014; 
Baumüller, 2015 ), and provision of climatic information ( e.g. Baardewijk, 2017; Cole & 
Fernando, 2012 ), among others.   These improvements have tended to emerge from the 
expressed affordances of ICT – rapid processing and communication of data, faster and 
broader social interaction (Heeks, 2018) .  These affordances, based on the technologies’ 
inherent function alities, tend to  necessarily improve rapidity and scale . 
 
Of the three attributes, strengthening of robustness was seen least.  This may relate to the 
requirement for complementary resources in order to turn data into resilience impacts.  
Such complementar ities are least -required for mobile phones when used as simple 
communication devices  (Mtega & Msungu, 2013; Mwantimwa, 2019; Sife et al. , 2010 ).  But 
this communicative simplicity has rather limited the impact of these devices on  robustness 
(to some extent  strengthening institutional capacities and physical preparedness) ( Mittal & 
Tripathi, 2009; Ogunniyi & Ojebuyi, 2016; Shaffril et al. , 2015 ).  More complex ICTs – such as 
geographic information systems (GIS) and remote sensing technolog ies for  monitoring  
climate events and related shocks and trends – are crucial for building robustness; physical 
preparedness especially  (Belal et al. , 2014; World Bank, 2014; Zhao et al. , 2005) .  However, 
such ICTs require a substantial level of skills, knowledge, technical infrastructure, money, 
etc.: resources that are typically in short  supply in developing countries,  especially in rural 
areas (Heeks, 2018).  
 
Even within households, the need for complementary resources may act as a brake on 
resilience impacts.   For example, the level of education of households was reported to 
impact the scale and rapidity benefits obtained  from ICT4Ag: in other words, lack of 
knowledge and skills constraining the realisation of ICT functionalities into resilience -
relevant afforda nces  (Ali & Kumar, 2011; Krone et al. , 2016 ). 
 
Finally, institutional and structural factors constrain the potential impact of ICTs.  Provision 
of ICT -enabled market and climatic information can strengthen these resilience attributes.  
But traditional sour ces and channels of information sustain even in the face of ICTs 
(Duncombe, 2006).   They do this because of cultural norms and because trust and social 
relations (see above) remain heavily invested in traditional information channels ( Ajwang, 
2014; Baumüll er, 2015; Gyan, 2018; Mwakaje, 2010 ). 
 
D1.3 High ICT4Ag Contribution: Learning, Redundancy, and Diversity & F lexibility  
One reason these three attributes have been particularly strengthened by ICT4Ag is that 
interventions are designed to target these attri butes.  For example, various initiatives  (e.g. 
Baardewijk, 2017 ; Cole & Fernando, 2012 ; Fu & Akter, 2016 ; Krone et al. , 2016) have 
focused on building  agricultural and /or climatic knowledge, thus improving learning .  
Financial issues are a part of many ICT4Ag initiatives whether reducing expenditure via the 
digital affordance of journey substitution or increasing income by improving farm 
productivity, market access, remittance access, or access to mobile money ( Baumüll er, 
2015 ; Gyan, 2018; Kikulwe et al. , 2014).  All of these have addressed the resource spareness 
element of redundancy.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
41 
 In the design of many ICT4Ag initiatives, ICTs tend to complement existing 
services/resources rather than substituting them (Duncombe, 2006); hence tending to 
increase the diversity of sub -systems and chann els available to rural households .  ICTs’ 
multi -functionality also tends to inherently provide flexibility for users.  
 
The perceived utility (beliefs and motivations) about particular a ttributes may also have an 
influence here.  The realities of climate change – needs for both short -term coping and 
longer -term adaptation – have created an impetus for rural households; particularly in 
relation to wanting to acquire new know ledge (learning ) and to diversif y from or within 
agricultural activities (diversity  & flexibility ) (Heeks & Ospina, 2012) .  This expressed utility 
will both influence ICT4Ag project priorities and designs, and shape the way in which rural 
users employ the technologies pr ovided.  Hence, the relatively high incidence of benefits 
related to these attributes (e.g. Fu & Akter, 2016; Martin & Abbott, 2011; Mittal, 2015).  
 
Another likely explanation is that ICT4Ag initiatives affecting  these attributes have mostly 
supported exis ting activities , thus requiring fewer complementary changes  (Baird & Hartter, 
2017; Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013 ).  For example, through supporting diversification of crops 
already existing in an area , rather than trying to introduce new ones (Baumüller, 2015); 
supporting mobilisation of existing agricultural input s (Furuholt & Matotay, 2011 ); 
supporting market access flexibility  by linking to existing local markets  (Salia et al. , 2011 ); 
and journey substitutions (Sife et al. , 2010 ).  ICTs thus  have strengthened redundancy, and 
diversity & flexibility  with few or even no  institutional or structural relations changes 
required . 
 
D2. ICT4Ag and R esilience of Rural Com munities  
As evidenced in Section C 3.2, ICT4Ag makes a medium contribution  to self -organisation and 
a low contribution to all other attributes.  
 
D2.1 Medium ICT4Ag Contribution: Self -Organisation  
Self-organisation has been the leading resilience attribute strengthened by ICT s-in-
agric ulture in part because of deliberate ICT4Ag initiative designs to establish 
linkages/networks within communities.  Self-organisation has been a long -standing and 
well-established approach to agricultural and rural development.  For example, creating 
farmer groups is shown to help farmers incr ease their bargaining position, improve access 
to markets, and reduce their operational costs (Dannenberg & Lakes, 2013; Furuholt & 
Matotay, 2011; Masuki et al. , 2010).  More generally, group formation is widely -used to 
foster social learning and local kno wledge, and activate safety nets and existing capabilities 
(Berkes & Ross, 2013; Scott, 2013 ). 
 
Thus it is not surprising that ICT4Ag initiatives would prioritise this.  Some notable examples 
include mobile phone -based applications, such as M -Farm and Esok o (Arinloye et al. , 2015; 
Baumüller, 2015; Gyan, 2018), which have enabled the formation of contract -based linkages 
between groups of farmers and traders.  Alongside these new formations, ICT4Ag has 
worked “with the grain” of social structures given the ex isting strength of social capital and 
of community -level institutions within rural communities ( High et al.,  2005; Pretty, 2003).  
ICTs support these structures, particularly improving their collaboration and consensus -
building activities (Duncombe, 2014).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
42 
  
D2.2 Low ICT4Ag Contribution: Other Attributes  
The limited evidence of ICTs contributing to other attributes of community resilience 
reflects a relative lack of ICT4Ag practice and/or research at the community level other than 
in relation to self -organis ation (Duncombe, 2016) .  Notwithstanding some  support for 
community self -organisation, t he greater focus of interventions  has been  on individual 
farmers and households .  Our findings may also reflect the research process : out of the 45 
research papers , onl y four involved community -level body members during data collection .  
This may have limited the  extent of evidence gathered that would be relevant to 
community -level resilience.  
 
D3. Conceptualising ICT4Ag and Resilience  
Based on the summary of findings just presented, and integrating  and adapting two existing 
ICT-for-development  models (Heeks, 2018; Heeks & Shekhar, 2019a ), we can produce a 
conceptual model that captures the findings (see Figure D1).  Key features of the model are:  
 A differentiation between wider livelihood system  and the ICT4Ag digital system.  
 The working of any ICT4Ag system is driven by perceived utility – the beliefs and 
motivations of users – combined with the functionalities offered by the digital 
technology involved.  The former was reflected, for example, in the motivation of rural 
households to gain new knowledge to cope with climate change.  Utility and digital 
functionality  combine to create the realised affordances of the di gital system expresse d, 
for example, as data processing, communication and social interaction affordances.  
 The core working of any ICT4Ag system is an information value chain that processes data 
into information, which feeds decisions, actions and then results in terms of the impac ts 
on the systemic resilience attributes that have been described in detail above.  
 These value chain processes  require a set of resources in order to function effectively.  
As indicated in the diagram, these include knowledge and both “soft” and “hard ” other 
resources.   This was seen above hindering the diffusion and resilience impact of more 
complex ICTs which required resources scarce in rural areas: skills, knowledge, technical 
infrastructure, money, etc.  
 The ICT4Ag system processes including its re silience impacts will be shaped by wider 
systemic factors.  Not just the utility and digital functionalities already mentioned but 
also social factors including local institutions, resource access/control, and social 
structures.   This was seen, for example , in the reproduction and even reinforcement of  
gender inequalities by ICTs.  However, t hese wider  factors are also themselves shaped 
by the ICT4Ag system: seen, for example, where ICTs supported the social inclusion of 
marginalised actors.  
This model rela tes to the earlier livelihoods -based model  (see Figure B3)  – for example, 
incorporating the livelihood determinants and actions, the ICTs, and the resilience 
properties of the livelihood system.  But it gives more emphasis to the workings of the ICT 
system  and less emphasis to the wider vulnerability context (this could readily be added as a 
wider concentric ring but was omitted here for the sake of simplicity).  
 
Built inductively from the findings, this model can now be used in future for deductive 
analysis of the resilience impacts of ICT4Ag, and the factors affecting those impacts.Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
43 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure D1: ICT4Ag and resilience model  
 
Livelihood 
System  
Institutional  
Access &  
Control  
Structural 
Relations  
ICT4Ag 
System  
Afford -
ances  
Value Chain Processes  
Utility  
Resilience Results:  
- Robustness  
- Self-Organisation  
- Learning  
- Redundancy  
- Rapidity  
- Scale  
- Diversity &  
  Flexibility  
- Equality  
  
 
 
 
Resource Access and Control  
Data  
 Information  
 Decisions  
 Actions  
Knowledge  
“Soft” resources: 
skills, authority, 
social capital, etc.  
“Hard” resources: 
time, money, 
materials, etc.  
Digital 
Functionality  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
44 
  
E. Conclusions  and Recommendations  
 
This final section will  revisit the research question, and attempt to link the findings to the 
broader trends in the literature .  It then addresses the final two research objectives by making 
recommendatio ns for resilience practice and policy; by critically reflecting on the RABIT 
framework in relation to strengths, challenges, and potential revisions; and by proposing a 
future research agenda.  
 
E1. Revisiting  the Research Que stion  
To what extent is the use  of ICT s-in-agric ulture weakening or strengthening the resilience of 
rural households and communities in developing countries , and why ? 
 
Consi dering the evidence presented earlier , two conclusions can be suggested; first, overall the 
use of ICT s-in-agric ulture appears to be  strengthening the resilience of rural household s and 
communities in developing countries much more than it is weakening it; and secondly, ICT4Ag 
initiatives seem to attend to the resilience of households more than that of communities.  
 
Regarding the first conclusion , although the overall trend  is for strengthening resilience, the 
impact analysed from the literature was differentiated between resilience attributes.  The 
most -strengthened attributes – redundancy, diversity & flexibility , learning  at household level; 
self-organisation at community level – were associated with: specific targeting  by ICT4Ag 
initiatives compared to other attributes; the need for relatively fewer parallel changes (of 
resources, institutions, and structural relati ons of power); and the presence of individual -level 
drivers in the form of perceived utility of ICT4Ag impact on these particular attributes.  On the 
other hand, less- and least -strengthened attributes were associated with less focus of ICT4Ag 
initiatives;  greater need for complementary resources and other changes in order to achieve 
results; lower reports of individual motivation; and more evidence of weakening resilience 
alongside strengthening.   The link between resilience and the functionalities and exp ressed 
affordances of ICTs was also stronger with more -strengthened attributes.  
 
These findings formed the basis for  creation of a new ICT4Ag and resilience model, bringing 
together key findings about the importance of perceived utility, digital functional ity and 
affordances, the information value chain, the role of complementary resources, and the 
influence of wider systemic factors such as institutions and structural relations.  This echoes 
and reinforces similar messages found in the ICTs-for-development  (ICT4D ) literature ( Heeks, 
2010; 2018; Murphy & Carmody, 2015; Pieterse, 2010;  Zheng et al. , 2018 ). 
 
Although relatively limited evidence emerged from the literature about weakening of resilience, 
it remains a live concern; especially in relation to the costs of ICTs and the potential for 
augmentation of existing inequalities.  In turn, this both echoes a nd reinforces the growing 
literature on “digital harms”; harms which need to be identified and addressed as much as 
possible within project design (Heeks, 2016; Walsham, 2017; Wyche et al. , 2016 ). Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
45 
  
The second conclusion – ICTs being linked  to household res ilience more than community -level 
resilience – may reflect the  growing individualisation of ICT4D (Duncombe, 2016; Heeks, 2016) .  
As noted earlier, ICT innovations have propelled this but it may also be driven by changing 
conceptualisations of development with, for example the growing use of Amartya Sen’s (1999) 
ideas being linked to a more individualised model of development (Heeks, 2018; Zheng et al. , 
2018).  
 
In sum , therefore, it is suggested  that ICTs are building the resilience and adaptive capacities  of 
rural households and communities in developing countries, particularly through elimination of 
agricultural and market -related “information failures” – absence, quality, uncertainty, 
asymmetry, costs (Heeks & Molla, 2009) – that undermine learning; throu gh linkages and 
network  formation  that not only reinforce or build social structure but also provide greater 
resource access ; and by enabling a diversity  of courses of action to support existing activities, 
among others, thus improving agricultural product ion and reducing market -related challenges .  
However, so far, the contribution has been small and incremental, one that is still insufficient to 
deliver the long -term resilience of  rural  household s and communities in developing countries.  
 
E2. Recommendati ons for Practice  
Having summarised the reported contribution of ICTs to the resilience of households and 
communities, this sub-section analyses implications for practice.  
 
ICT4Ag seems to impact household resilience significantly more than community resilience.  
This argument and the overall resilience results may reflect how ICT4Ag cases are researched 
and written, but likely also reflects the reality that ICT4Ag focuses mu ch more at the level of 
individual farmers and households than on engaging with, and strengthening, whole 
communities.  This, in turn, reflects two elements indicated in the Figure D1 model.  First, that 
the potential functionalities and realised affordanc es of ICTs are increasingly associated with 
the individual rather than the community (Heeks, 2016), with some evidence (e.g. Lee & 
Bellemare, 2013;  Lwasa et al. , 2011; Masuki et al. , 2010) that this is leading to a general lack of 
awareness of and particip ation in community -level ICT systems and services.  One exemplar 
would be the move from community telecentre to individually -owned mobile phone as the 
epitomic technology in rural ICT4D.  Second, that it is much easier for ICT initiatives to deal with 
individual, atomised farmers than to engage with the politics and inertia of wider social 
structures (Mohamad & Gombe, 2017; Tenhunen, 2008).  
 
Let us accept the widely -held assumption that community -level resilience will be of central 
importance to the future of rural and agricultural development (Wilson, 2010; 2012).  There will 
thus be an argument for increasing the contribution of ICT4Ag to community resilience.  There 
may be some slight tension between community and household resilience: we came across the 
example of improved community self -organisation through contract -based networks between 
farmer groups and suppliers, weakening household diversity & flexibility by reducing incentives 
for crop diversification (Baumüller, 2015).  But, conversely, there were  other examples where 
strengthening community resilience had a positive knock -on for household resilience.  For Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
46 
 instance, the openness of market information at the community level influenced household 
equality (participation and inclusiveness) (Lwoga, 2010 ; Matuha, 2015).   The recommendation 
for greater ICT4Ag focus on community resilience thus seems appropriate.  
 
We can also look at the level of individual attributes, highlighting those where evidence to date 
shows relatively little contribution of ICT4Ag:  household -level self -organisation and equality 
and almost all the attributes at community level.  Assuming – and it is an important assumption 
– that all attributes are equally important to rural resilience, then we could recommend a 
greater priority for these as -yet underserved attributes; equal to that of the highest -
contribution attributes.  
 
Turning to features summarised in Figure D1, ICT4Ag systems will only function and will thus 
only impact resilience if there is some external drive or motivation – i.e. a perceived utility – 
that influences actors to engage with the system.  We saw this explicitly in relation to learning 
and to diversity & flexibility at the household level, but it is an ICT4D universal (Heeks, 2018).  
The implication is that ICT -enabled resilience building must either identify and work with 
existing motivation  to adopt and use technology , or must create such a perceived utility in 
relation to ICT4Ag systems, change and resilience  (Berkes & Ross, 2013; Béné et al. , 2016).  
 
The evidenc e above suggested that impacts were more often seen where there was less need 
for changes to the institutions and structural relations that form part of the wider livelihood 
system, and where the ICT used was relatively simple, thus requiring fewer complem entary 
resources.  However, such usages typically only result in small incremental improvements to 
the lives of agricultural households and communities ( Baird & Hartter, 2017; Dannenberg & 
Lakes, 2013 ; Mtega & Msungu, 2013 ) – note that the methodology used  above only relates to 
prevalence of impact on resilience, not the depth of impact.  To create a greater depth of 
impact on resilience then more transformative change may be required.  Heeks (2018) 
formulates this in terms of a “DIRT ladder” of ICT impact:  from simple Digitisation of existing 
processes, through ICT -enabled Improvement of processes and ICT -enabled system 
Reorganisation to structural Transformation.  
 
But, to achieve this, may require two things.  First, a shift from use of relatively simple I CT4AG 
systems, such as those based on basic mobile phones, to those based on more complex ICT 
systems, such as those mentioned above such as  remote sensing data and GIS.  This argument 
is supported by evidence from various studies (e.g. Krone et al. , 2016;  Garcia & Fan, 2015; 
Sambasivan et al. , 2016) that show greater developmental benefits achieved when more 
complex ICT systems are employed.  Second, a greater extent of changes complementary to the 
introduction of digital: not merely the provision of resources that will enable the full 
information value chain to operate, but also parallel changes in the institutions and structures 
of the wider livelihood system.  It should be noted, though, that implementing more complex 
systems and parallel systemic d evelopments mean a greater extent of change and, hence, a 
greater risk of failure (Heeks, 2018).  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
47 
 Figure E1 summarises the arguments made in this sub -section . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure E1: Summary of recommendations for practice  
 
 
E3. Policy Recommendations  
Three policy recommendations will be presented here, relating  to three themes discussed in 
the two sub -sections above : the need for parallel changes, the resilience disbenefits (“negative 
impacts”) associated with ICTs, and the need to attend more equally to household and 
community -level resilience.  
 
As just  summari sed, other changes need to be implemented alongside ICT4D interventions .  
Regarding changes related to complementary information value chain resources, among other 
things, policies that encourage the expansion of  power and telecommunication s infrastructure , 
ICT-enabled change  
Transformation  
 More complex 
use of ICTs  
Livelihood System  
(household, community)  
Discovered or 
created actor 
motivation / 
utility  
Greater equality of focus: on both 
household & community; across all 
attributes  
Higher risks 
of failure  
ICT4Ag System  
Improved 
Resilience  
 Reorganisation  
Improvement  
Digitisation  
Parallel changes 
(institutions, 
resources, structural 
relations)  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
48 
 education  and availability of finance  in rural areas, will likely prove  beneficial (Muto & Yamano, 
2009; World Bank, 2014) .  Such policies are more important  when more complex applications  
of ICTs are involved; ones that are more demanding in terms of costs ( the devices, services), 
capacities  (skills and knowledge),  and material requirements  (technical  infrastructure) .  
Inclusive development policy approaches including those that seek to bu ild state capacity may 
be relevant here (Bukenya & Yanguas, 2013).   Moreover, involvement of other institutions, such 
as educational institutions ( e.g. universities),  private sector providers, non-governmental 
organisations (NGO s), and developmental agenci es, is also pivotal, since they can facilitate 
provision of knowledge, operation of advisory services, and changes in human behaviour; thus, 
addressing some specific resilience - or ICT -related challenges faced by farmers (Westermann et 
al., 2018).  
 
Regardi ng the negative impacts of ICTs, evidence points mainly  to equality and redundancy 
(costs of ICTs) .  One approach to improve this would be the expansion of technological and 
financial infrastructure to marginalised rural groups, as highlighted above .  Othe r relevant 
interventions target ing marginalised rural groups would include policies that improve 
capability -building ( e.g. skills, leadership, among others), affordability, and the fl ow of 
knowledge and information  (Asongu et al. , 2018; Heeks, 2016) .  Policies that facilitate the use 
of ICTs by other actors ( e.g. NGO s, development  agencies) when delivering information and 
services to marginalised rural groups can also be instrumental in improving digital inclusion 
(Foster & Heeks, 2013; Heeks, 2016) .  In te rms of affordability , pro -poor tax reforms that aim to 
improve ownership, adoption and use of ICTs among remote and poor households and 
communities can reduce cost burdens associated with ICTs .  Alongside universal service 
obligations, there  is also a pote ntial for cost control through the utility of a quasi -independent 
regulatory body that monitors and regulates competition of, and costs ( e.g. network  inter -
connect costs) set by ICT service providers ( e.g. telecommunication companies, Internet service 
providers) ( Heeks, 2016; Payumo  et al. , 2017 ). 
 
As regards improving the contribution of ICTs to community resilience, there may be a need to 
create  an enabling environment that fosters the use of ICTs at the community level 
(Westermann et al. , 2018; World  Bank, 2012) .  Such an environment can promote awareness, 
participation, and social learning via social interactions and the role of “infomediaries” (Heeks, 
2018) .  Additionally, policies that promote the coalescence of households into commun ity-level 
units, such as farmer  cooperatives, producer organisations, among others, can contribute to 
improving self -organisation and scale at the community level, which can serve as a foundation 
for ICT-enabled community -level resilience ( CTA, 2014 ).  Moreover, given t he interdependence 
of different resilience levels, there is a need to promote  awareness among practitioners and 
research ers of attending to all levels.  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
49 
 E4. A Critical Reflection on the RABIT Framework  
The RABIT framework has been instrumental in the analysis conducted here.  It has provided a 
clear conceptual linkage between ICTs and resilience that has enabled extraction and analysis of 
evidence from the ICT4Ag literature.  Its support for multi -scale analysis (both household and 
community) has provi ded a fuller understanding of rural resilience, and has formed a central 
element of the structure of the analysis.  The resilience attributes and associated markers were 
central to the operationalisation of the framework, with most of the evidence fitting well into 
the existing attributes; thus, suggesting a good level of completeness.  However, there were 
some challenges encountered during the analysis; these are discussed next alongside 
suggestions for improvements.  
 
E4.1 Incorporating individual actors a nd agency  
We have already noted the importance of the motivation of individuals and their perceptions of 
technology  utility in gaining a full understanding  of the pattern of reported ICT impacts  on 
resilience .  Alongside this there was evidence of needing to understand individual actors within 
those impacts, with examples of ICTs influencing the motivation, perception, and self -
confidence of household members to deal with  resilience -related  challenges and oppo rtunities, 
especially after managing to use ICTs successfully in their agricultural activities.  For example, 
some farmers were motivated to try new agricultural technologies after being exposed to and 
learning to use ICTs (Fu & Akter, 2016); while others (e.g. fishers) were more confident in 
undertaking decisions or new courses of action  knowing they have accurate information 
received through ICTs (Salia et al. , 2011).  There was also evidence of ICTs weakening 
motivation, primarily when farmers had bad ex periences while using ICTs.  For example, a 
farmer experiencing financial loss due to sales via the M -Farm platform was demotivated to try 
new technologies for agriculture (Ajwang, 2014).  This did not readily fit with any of the existing 
attributes despit e its obvious importance given it chimes with the analysis showing the 
importance of actor motivation and perceived utility.  
 
More generally, within theories of sociology (e.g. Hurrelmann, 1988; Sewell, 1992; Shilling, 
1992 ) and in the literature on climat e adaptation (e.g. Adger, 2003; Brown & Westaway, 2011 ; 
Grothmann & Patt, 2005; Phillips, 2003 ) there is a good deal of agreement on the mutual 
interaction and importance of structure, process, resources and agency.  Yet, looking at the 
RABIT framework, on e can see a reflection of structure (physical preparedness, social and other 
networks, innovation mechanisms, etc.); of process (collaboration, reflective thinking, issue 
detection, etc.); and of resources (spareness, substitutability, scale of access, etc .).  But notions 
of agency are not well represented: individuals and their driving forces are largely absent.  
 
One way to deal with this would be to add a third, “nano -level” scope: analysing the impact of 
ICT4Ag on the resilience of individuals.  Much has  been written about the importance of 
individual -level resilience, including its importance within rural resilience (Brown & Westaway, 
2011; Kimhi, 2016 ; Sina et al.,  2019 ).  Thus there would be a logic and justification for this 
addition though the attrib utes would potentially need to be modified to make them 
appropriate to an individual person.  An alternative would be to add a ninth “motivation” 
attribute to the general model which incorporated agency and drive for change through Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
50 
 markers such as motivati on for change, self -efficacy, and hope for the future.  These are all 
known to be important in building individual resilience and also action on resilience more 
generally which would cascade upwards into household and community resilience ( e.g. Berkes 
& Ro ss, 2013; Brown & Westaway, 2011; Heeks & Krishna, 2016; Jones & Tanner, 2017 ; Smith & 
Frankenb erger, 2018 ). 
 
To reinforce this point, all resilience -building assumes action for change.  But that action will 
not happen unless individual actors are motivate d for change, believe they can make a 
difference, and that change will be positive.  Thus, these motivational and dispositional aspects 
of human agency are arguably a foundation for resilience without which no other elements can 
occur.  Such an addition wo uld also have the advantage of combined the relatively objectivist 
approach to resilience that RABIT represents with the more subjectivist approach reflected in 
the sources cited just above.  
 
E4.2 Boundary -setting  
An inherent challenge of system s thinking is setting the system boundary (Berkes & Ross, 2013; 
Heeks & Ospina, 2019 ).  Two attributes, self -organisation and scale, particularly required setting 
a boundary to determine what is inside and outside the system upon operationalisation; yet, 
this is not always clear, especially when analysing literature.  For example, evidence of a 
farmers’ group collaborating with police during cattle robbery (e.g. in Sife et al. , 2010) can be 
classified under the self -organisation attribute (community -scope) if police are considered to be 
inside the boundary of the system (i.e. community), or under scale of resource access if they 
are considered outside the boundary.  Similar ly, whether evidence falls under intra -level or 
multi -level networks (under scale) largely depen ds on where the boundary is set.  In both cases, 
a decision was made to set  an institution outside a boundary unless there was clear evidence 
that it was within – but this was a choice that could have been made differently.  
 
Similar decisions had to be mad e on other boundary issues.  Under equality, the inclusiveness 
and participation marker was extended under household scope to mean inclusion of the 
household or its members within wider system functions, not just the functions of the 
household.  There was also evidence of ICTs influencing trust, but not quite fitting under the 
self-organisation attribute, since the resources and individuals involved were outside the 
boundary of the system.  For example, an individual farmer (household scope) building trust 
with an individual trader/customer (outside of household boundary) (Salia et al. , 2011; Labonne 
& Chase, 2009).  On this, in future, trust might be included under the scale attribute, 
particularly because the two markers (“intra -level networks” and “multi -level networks”) are 
concerned with linkages/network  formation, which is known to be associated with trust (similar 
to “social network and trust” under self -organisation) ( Carmody, 2013; Burrell & Oreglia, 2015; 
Duncombe, 2016; Molony, 2006 ). 
 
E4.3 Incorpo rating power  
The livelihood system determinants shown in Figure D1 – resource control, institutional control, 
structural relations – are all determinants of power (Heeks & Shekhar, 2019b).  In turn, we 
know power to be an important determinant of resilienc e outcomes (Brown, 2016).  Yet, just as Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
51 
 with agency, the RABIT framework is currently rather limited in its incorporation of power.  It is 
reflected to some degree in the equality attribute though even here we needed to provide an 
additional interpretation : under inclusiveness and participation at community level, we 
included evidence about power relations in markets (e.g. Ajwang, 2014; Furuholt & Matotay, 
2011) but only by somewhat broadening the intended coverage of this marker.  The RABIT 
framework could  therefore be modified to include markers that more explicitly represent 
determinants of power.  The three equality markers are already helpful in this respect including 
control over resources – but issues of equality of control over institutions and withi n structural 
relations might be more explicitly recognised (Heeks, 2018).  
 
E4.4 Marker clarity  
A framework has to be generic enough to be applicable in varying situations ( Béné, 2013 ), and 
we also acknowledge that the experience and knowledge of a research er in his/her respective 
domain is important for interpretation and operationalisation of a framework ( Chambers, 
1997 ).  Nonetheless, t he absence of marker descriptions made a few markers challenging to 
understand, mainly due to potential overlap with othe r markers.  For example, the 
“institutional capacity” marker under robustness has potential overlap with the “local 
leadership” and “collaboration and consensus -building” markers under self -organisation, and 
the “capacity building” marker under learning.  Similarly, the “social networks and trust” 
marker under self -organisation at the community level has some potential overlap with the 
“intra -level networks” marker under scale at the community level.  
 
While the operationalisation of these was resolved durin g the initial inter -coder discussions, the 
absence of marker descriptions was a problem; indeed, much of the initial inter -coder 
discussion centred around development of greater clarity about markers.  We thus see that a  
generic descriptions of markers is  useful for operationalisation of the RABIT framework; an 
argument that concurs with Heeks & Ospina (2019), who recommended  associating descriptors 
and even explicit indicators with  each of the markers to improve their operationalisation.  
Given this, a ma trix of the descriptions and examples of how the markers were understood and 
operationalised in this research is included in Appendix C, with the hope that such details will 
contribute to the improvement of the RABIT framework operationalisation.  
 
E4.5 Met hodological limitations  
Our application of the RABIT framework has implicitly assumed equal weighting for all 
attributes and markers.  This can be questioned generically: for example, one could argue that 
the foundational attributes should be given a great er weighting.  And it can be questioned 
contextually: in any particular rural area, the population might very well award a higher 
weighting to some framework components than others.  Ideally, that would be recognised in  
some way in applying the model by al lowing an attribute -weighting stage where relevant.  
 
Another limitation already noted above is that our literature analysis was based on binary 
measurement: counting a source if it mentioned an impact that could be related to a marker or 
attribute; excludi ng it if not.  But this tells us nothing about the depth of impact; treating 
equally a source identifying a slight effect and one identifying a transformative effect.  We have Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
52 
 brought this issue into the discussion above but could consider some impact scal e being 
associated with each of the resilience attributes/markers to indicate by how much they are 
changing as the result of, say, an ICT -based intervention.  
 
E5. Limitation s and Future Rese arch  
There were some limitations associated with this research  in addition to those implicit within 
our critical reflections in Section D3 .  Initial co -coding was undertaken: an iterative process over 
the course of some weeks between both authors of discussing specific impact examples  from 
the literature , their classification against level (household / community), attributes and markers 
which led to considerable clarification and agreement on the definition, nature and boundaries 
of those three elements  (as reflected, for example, in Appendix C) .  However, the re mainder of 
the literature coding was then undertaken by one person – author Hanson – where dual coding 
could have improved overall rigour.  We also acknowledge that this was post -hoc 
reinterpretation of ICT4Ag literature meaning that selection of focal fra mework and author pre -
conceptions will have influenced that interpretation . 
 
Interpretation was also limited by the nature of the evidence that is reported  in the selected 
literature.  What we analyse here is not the reality of ICT s-in-agric ulture, nor the  reality of ICTs’ 
impact on rural resilience.  Instead it is analysis of what writers have chosen to report.  Use of a 
reasonable number of sources should have helped here, avoiding biases that might be present 
within a smaller sample.  However, we noted a bove the possibility that the much smaller 
impact on community compared to household resilience could in part be an artefact of 
reporting.  Likewise, a bias towards documenting positive impacts could explain some of the 
imbalance between strengthening vs. weakening of resilience.   Both of these issues must be 
handled more equitably in future research.  
 
A key point noted during initial and full coding was that the intended focus for resilience is 
disturbances external to the system, which were understood in terms of short -term shocks and 
longer -term trends.  However, in interpreting the evidence, we relied far more on ICTs’ impact 
on core, regular system activities; most particularly the conventional agricultural value chain 
from purchase of inputs through gr owth of products to their sales.  This is because – while 
there was a little evidence of shocks, such as animal attacks – this formed only a small minority 
of the evidence base.  Solely relying on shock -/trend -based evidence would therefore have 
made it im possible to perform a credible analysis.  
 
All this points to the value of moving from a post -hoc to a pre-hoc approach; going into the field 
armed with the RABIT framework (amended, potentially, as suggested earlier  in relation to 
agency and power , and to  localised attribute weighting and impact measurement ) and 
gathering primary data against each of the attributes and markers in relation to the impact of 
ICTs-in-agric ulture.   The RABIT framework explain s what  the impact of ICTs is on resilience.  The 
new m odel outlined in Figure D1 can be used as a complement  in future research ; helping to 
explain why this impact is seen.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
53 
 Appendix A : ICT4Ag Literature Mentioning Resilience  
 
Appendix A  presents a summary of the articles found during the review of ICTs-in-agriculture, 
which specifically mentioned  resilience.  
 
The top three ICT4D journals ( Information Technology for Development , Information 
Technologies and International Development , and The Electronic Journal of Information Systems 
in Developing Countries ) were searched using the string “resilien*”, but no relevant article on 
resilience and ICT4Ag was found. Then Google Scholar (excluding patents and citations) was 
searched using three different search strings, as summarised in Table AA1 . 
 
Table AA1: Googl e Scholar search string and results counts  
Search string  Number of results 
returned  
intitle:resilience AND (intext:“ICT4AG” OR intext:“e -agriculture” OR 
intext:ICT4D OR intext:ICTD)  34 
intitle:resilience intitle:agriculture OR intitle:agricultural AND 
intext:“information and communication technologies”  8 
(intitle:resilience OR intitle:resilient intext:resilience)  (intext:ICT4D OR 
intext:ICTs OR intext:ICTD) (intext:agriculture OR intext:agricultural OR 
intext:farming) developing countries  148 
 
These were reviewed and combined to produce thirteen articles, that were in some way 
discussing  agriculture (or at least have the  word “agriculture” in the body), ICT and at least the 
word “resilience” in the title.  Table AA2  presents a summary of these art icles; indicating the 
lack of literature on ICT4Ag and resilience and hence requiring the re -analysis of a wider body 
of ICT4Ag literature using a resilience framework.  
 
Note that the projects  whose frameworks were identified (NICCD : Nexus for ICTs, Climate 
Change and Development  and DEAR : Digital Engagement and Resilience ), were also searched, 
and two more case studies from NICCD were identified – Heeks & Ospina (2016 a; 2016b) – 
which are utilised in the main text.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
54 
  
Table AA2: Articles Summary Review  
Author  Title  Year  Focus categorisation  Comments  
Ospina & Heeks ( 2010)  Linking ICTs and climate change adaptation: A conceptual frame work for e -
resilience and e -adaptation  2010  Resilience Framework  Related to the RABIT framework; building e -resilience framework . 
Douxchamps et al.  (2017)  Monitoring and evaluation of climate resilience for agricultural development –a 
review of currently available tools  2017  ICT4A g No focus on ICT . 
Heeks & Ospina (2015)  Analysing urban community informatics from a resilience perspective  2015  ICT4D  There is a focus on resilience and ICTs. But it i s on urban communities , not rural 
and agriculture.  
Muktar et al.  (2018b)  Evaluation of ICTs access, use and preferences for livelihood resilience: results from 
a survey of Malaysian fisherfolks  2018  ICT4A g Resilience is defined, but not used as a lens for evaluation ( Sustainable Livelihoods  
Approach  is used instead) . 
Ozor et al . (2015)  Using the Land Potential Knowledge System (LandPKS) mobile technology for 
agricultural pr oductivity and resil ience  2015  ICT4A g Resilience is only mentioned as a word. No definition or any theoretical linkage is 
made.  
Muktar et al.  (2018b)  Fishers ICTs use for early warning reception, it’s effect on livelihood resilience and 
sustainability in East Coast Malaysia  2018  ICT4A g There is a focus on resilience though not too detailed; the term is used to build the 
concept of livelihood resilience. But t he article then uses Protective Motivation 
Theor y to carry out an analysis . 
Haworth et al.  (2018)  Geographic information and communication technologies for supporting 
smallholder agriculture and climate resilie nce 2018  ICT4A g Resilience is only mentioned as a word. No definition or any theoretical linkage is 
made.  
Jimenez & Ramirez -Villegas (2018)  Unlocking big data’s potential to strengthen farmers’ resilience: the platform for big 
data in agric ulture  2018  ICT4A g Resilience is only mentioned as a word. No definition or any theoretical linkage is 
made. More focus sed on big data . 
Ozor (2015)  Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change using the Land 
Potential Knowledge System (LandPKS) mobile tech nology  2015  ICT4A g Techno -centric; no definition or any theoretical linkage to resilience is made . 
Verma et al.  (2017)  Crafting climate resilience for people at bottom of pyramid using digital in novation  2017  ICT4A g Resilien ce is only mentioned in the title.  
Baliwada et al.  (2014)  Climate  resilient technologies for sustainable agricu lture  2014  ICT4A g Resilience is not defined nor is a resilien ce conceptual framework used . 
Ospina & Heeks (2016)  Resilience Assessment Benchmarking and Impact Toolkit (RABIT)  2016  Resilience  framework  Uses the RABIT framework . 
Ospina et al.  (2016)  Benchmarking urban community resilience: piloting the Resilience Assessment 
Benchmarking and Impact Toolkit (RABIT) in Costa Rica  2016  ICT4D  A focus on urban resilience, not rural/ agriculture.  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
55 
 Appendix B : Summary of Systematic Literature Review  
 
Table AB1: Unique article  weakness and strength resilience attribute mapping  
Article 
reference 
number  Household  Community  
Grand Total  Foundational  Enabling  Foundational  Enabling  
Learning  Robustness  Self‐
Organisation  Diversity 
& 
Flexibility  Equality  Rapidity  Redundancy  Scale  Learning  Robustness  Self‐
Organisation  Diversity 
& 
Flexibility  Equality  Rapidity  Redundancy  Scale  
S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W S W 
1 1  1    1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1        1  1  12 
2 1  1    1  1                        4 
3       1                   1       2 
4 1          1  1  1                  4 
5 1  1  1  1   1 1  1  1                  8 
6 1  1  1 1 1  1 1 1  1  1     1 1 1           13 
7   1          1            1        3 
8 1  1    1      1  1      1   1         7 
9 1  1    1      1             1       5 
10 1      1  1  1  1  1      1     1   1  1  10 
11 1          1  1  1                  4 
12 1        1 1 1              1        5 
13 1  1  1  1  1  1  1 1 1      1    1    1    12 
14 1  1    1    1  1 1 1                  7 
15 1            1                    2 
16   1    1  1    1                    4 
17   1    1  1    1             1       5 
18 1        1      1      1     1      1 6 
19 1  1    1  1    1  1                  6 
20  1 1  1  1  1  1  1    1  1 1 1      1    1  13 
21 1        1      1  1  1  1        1  1  8 
22 1      1   1 1  1  1           1       7 
23 1  1    1    1  1  1    1  1  1  1  1  1    12 
24 1      1    1  1  1      1            6 
25 1  1  1      1  1  1  1    1      1  1  1  11 
26   1  1  1  1  1  1 1 1      1            9 
27 1  1  1  1    1  1        1          1  8 
28 1  1    1    1  1                  1  6 
29 1      1    1  1  1                  5 
30 1  1  1  1      1            1        6 
31       1    1  1  1          1        5 
32             1                    1 
33             1        1    1        3 
34 1            1 1 1                  4 
35 1      1    1  1  1                  5 
36 1  1  1  1    1  1 1 1           1       9 
37 1  1    1    1  1                    5 
38 1  1       1 1    1  1    1  1    1      9 
39   1  1  1    1  1  1      1            7 
40       1  1    1  1                  4 
41         1    1                    2 
42     1  1    1          1            4 
43 1    1  1    1  1  1                  6 
44 1      1  1              1          4 
45   1    1      1  1                  4 
Total 31 1 24 0 12 1 32 0 16 5 26 0 37 5 27 0 5 0 4 2 17 1 3 1 7 7 4 0 6 0 7 1 282 
 
Key:  S – Strength, W – Weakn ess Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
56 
 Appendix C : Resilience Marker Descriptors  
 
Table AC1: Resilience marker descriptors: overview summary  
Resilience  
Attributes  Key Markers/ Indicators  
FOUNDATIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF HOUSEHOLD/ COMMUNITY RESILIENCE  
Robustness   Physical preparedness (physical ability to withstand or recover from shocks)  
 Institutional capacity (ability of institutional sub -systems to function including withstanding or 
recovering from shocks)  
 Loose functional coupling (relative independence of sub -systems so that collap se in one does 
not have a domino effect on others)  
Self-
Organisation   Collaboration and consensus -building (extent of mechanisms that enable collaborative 
decision -making and other activities)  
 Social networks and trust (extent of structures and other bases for self -organising actions incl. 
bonding social capital within system)  
 Local leadership (in order to drive or guide self -organisation)  
Learning   Capacity building (ability to create new skills and related competencies: capacity to learn and 
implement learning)  
 Reflective thinking (extent of specific learning processes)  
 New and traditional knowledge (indicators that learning has been achieved through the 
creation or exposure of knowledge)  
ENABLING ATTRIBUTES OF HOUSEHOLD/ COMMUNITY RESILIENCE  
Redundancy   Resource spareness (extent of availability of resources beyond basic system functioning 
requirements)  
 Resource substitutability (extent to which resources can substitute for one another w ithin and 
between categories)  
 Functional overlaps ( extent of sub-systems  that can substitute functionally for one another if 
one sub-system collapses)  
Rapidity   Rapid issue detection (speed of detecting an external opportunity or disturbance e.g. via 
data/information from early warning systems)  
 Rapid issue assessment (speed of assessing the nature (e.g. deciding on likely risk and impact) 
of an external disturbance)  
 Rapid issue response (speed of mobilising resources in response to external disturbance ) 
Scale   Scale of resource access (size and source diversity of access to resources like money, 
technology, food, information, etc.) 
 Multi -level networks (structural basis (e.g. linking social capital) for access to resources beyond 
the system)  
 Intra -level networks (structural basis (e.g. bridging social capital between different units of 
system) for access to resources within the system)  
Diversity & 
Flexibility   Variety of courses of action (number of different actions that could be taken e.g. in response 
to an external disturbance or to take advantage of opportunities)  
 Adaptable decision -making (ability of decision -making in the system to cope with problems or 
opportunities)  
 Innovation mechanism (basis for developing new ideas, processes and te chnologies within the 
system)  
Equality   Equality of distribution of assets (across inter -sectional dimensions and including all livelihood 
capitals: human, financial, natural, social, physical)  
 Inclusiveness and participation (within key system functions including decision -making)  
 Openness and accountability (of key system functions including decision -making)  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
57 
 Table AC2: Resilience marker  descript ors: detailed multi -level description  and examples  
Resilience  
Attributes  Definition  Key Markers/  
Indicators  Community R esilience  Household R esilience  
Description  Examples  Description  Examples  
FOUNDATIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF RESILIENCE  
Robustness  The ability of the 
household/community to 
maintain its characteristics 
and performance in the 
face of environmental 
shocks and fluctuations.  Physical 
preparedness  Physical preparedness of the 
community/community -level body 
because of using ICTs . Community -organised group improve walls in 
the riverbank in preparation for expected heavy 
rain due to informati on received through ICTs . Physical preparedness at the household level 
because of using ICTs . Planting seeds that take a short time to 
harvest due to information of insufficient 
rainfall through ICTs . 
Institutional 
capacity  ICTs enabling community or community -
level body as a unit to continue to function 
in the face of shocks/fluctuations . Farmers living close to the national parks 
reporting poaching activities to the 
authorities/wildlife patrols through ICTs, thus 
enabling the capacity of the patrol g roup . ICTs enabling household as a unit to continue to 
function in the face of shocks/fluctuations . Evidence of ICTs improving the capacity of the 
household to deal with a shock by facilitating 
better communications.  
Loose functional 
coupling  ICTs enabling community/community -level 
body to function with minimum 
dependency on other bodies.  Evidence of ICTs helping advisory systems to 
operate with minimum dependency on 
transportation system/department/body.  ICTs enabling households to function 
indepen dently; that is with no dependency on 
another household.  Evidence of ICTs reducing the dependency of a 
household on another household for obtaining 
agricultural information.  
Self-
Organisation  The ability of the 
household/community to 
independently re-arrange 
its functions and 
processes in the face of an 
external disturbance, 
without being forced by 
external influences.  
 Collaboration 
and consensus‐
building  The use of ICTs to improve/en courage 
collaboration and consensus -building of 
the community or among members of the 
community via a community -level body.  Community members use of mobile phones to 
organ ise community events to drive away 
baboons ; a notorious crop -raiding species.  The use of ICTs during collaboration/consensus 
building that impact s the household. This excludes 
uses  that specifically target the household head as 
they fall under local leadership.  ICTs improving collaboration among 
household members when deciding farming 
practices , etc. 
Social networks 
and trust  The use of ICTs that  facilitate building 
networks that can coalesce into a single 
community system.  ICTs allowing farmers to form and maintain 
groups easily . ICTs improving social network s and trust among 
household members.  Farmers using mobile phones to stay 
connected with f amily during farming 
activities, especially when farming activities 
are undertaken away from home for an 
extended period.  
Local leadership  The use of ICTs to improve community -
level leadership or leadership of a 
community -level body . ICTs helping the leader of a farmer group to  
coordinate group activities.  The use of ICTs by the household head when 
providing guidance and leadership in the 
household . The use of mobile phones by the household 
head to provide instructions and guidance 
when a child is sic k. 
Learning   
 
The capacity of the 
household/community to 
generate feedback with 
which to gain or create 
knowledge and strengthen 
skills and capacities. 
Closely linked to the 
household’s ability to 
experiment, discover and 
innovate.  
 Capacity 
building  Community’s or community -level body ’s 
learning capacity building facilitated using 
ICTs. Community -level body using ICTs to acquire 
skills that improve its learning capacity . Household building learning capacity due to either 
using ICTs to get opportunities to learn, or 
improving skills, e.g. reading, writing due to using 
ICTs, that then bo lster learning capacity.  Farmers learning how to use online platforms 
to gain more knowledge about agricultural 
practices.  
New and 
traditional 
knowledge  The use of ICTs in preserving, informing 
and promoting the use of new and 
traditional knowledge at the community 
level and among community -level bodies . The use of a mobile phone to share traditional 
knowledge between two g eneration groups in 
pastoralist  societies ( e.g. elders and warriors) . The use of ICTs to access and learn about new 
knowledge at the household level . Farmers using a mobile phone to access new 
knowledge about agricultural practices . 
Reflective 
thinking  The use of  ICTs among community -level 
bodies  to identify gaps based on what is 
known, and acquire ne w knowledge to 
address those gaps . The use of ICTs among farmers  cooperating  to 
brainstorm  challenges and identify solutions to 
the problems they face.  Individual hou seholds using ICTs to identify gaps 
based on what is known and acqu ire new 
knowledge to address those  gaps. Farmers using ICTs to identify diseases 
infecting their produce, and find ways to treat 
them.  
ENABLING ATTRIBUTES OF RESILIENCE  
Redundancy   
 
The extent to which 
household/community 
resources and institutions 
are substitutable; for 
example, in the event of 
disruption or degradation.  
 Resource 
spareness  ICTs facilitating resource spareness (e.g. 
saving money and time, increasing 
income) at community  level / in a 
community -level body . Groups of farmers  use ICTs to  mobilise and then 
collectively negotiate  better  tractor prices 
together.  ICTs facilitating resource spareness (e.g. saving 
money and time, increasing income) at household 
level . Farmers reducing the cost of farming -related 
transactions due to the use of mobile money 
services.  
Resource 
substitutability  ICTs facilitating substitutability of 
community -level resources and 
institutions . A community radio using data from the internet 
to substitute  or supplement data previously 
provided locally . ICTs facilitating substitutability of household 
resources . Journey substitution at the household level . 
Functional 
overlaps  ICTs used at community/community -level 
body to provide similar functionality to 
existing resources/systems.  Community radio using two channels – SMS or 
calls – to allow farmer  to submit queries which 
were then responded via radio for wide impact . ICTs impacting household due to the various 
functionalities it offers th at either substitute, 
complement or enhance existing functional needs . The use of mobile -based agricultural 
information platforms alongside  face -to-face 
means  of sharing information . 
Rapidity   
 
The speed at which assets 
can be accessed or 
mobilised by 
household/community 
stakeholders to achieve Rapid issue 
detection  The use of ICTs that enhance the speed at 
which issues are being detected by a 
community/community -level body  (speed 
of accessing information) . Community -level body detecting a cattle disease 
outbreak more quickly because of using ICTs.  The use of ICTs that enhance the speed at which 
issues are being detected b y a 
household/household member  (speed of accessing 
information) . Fisherm en quickly detecting a coming storm 
while at sea due to the notification they 
receive using their mobile phones.  
Rapid issue 
assessment  The use of ICTs that enhance the speed at 
which issues are being assessed by a  
community/community -level body  (speed 
of decision making) . A community weather station being able to 
quickly assess the expected level of impact of 
the coming heavy storm due to the use of ICTs.  The use of ICTs that enhances the speed at which 
issues are being assessed by a 
household/household member  (speed of decision 
making) . Evidence of a farmer making sales decisions 
(e.g. selling price) quickly due to the use of 
ICTs.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
58 
 goals in an efficient 
manner.  
 Rapid issue 
response 
(resource 
mobilisation)  ICTs facilitating quick response at the 
community level  or from a community -
level body  (speed of action) . A community -level security body able to 
respond quickly to an emergency due to use of 
ICTs.  ICTs enhancing the speed at which the response to 
issues is happening by a household/household 
member  (speed of action) . Evidence of farmers receiving payments and 
remittances quickly using mobile money.  
Scale   
 
The breadth of assets and 
structures a 
household/community 
can access to effectively 
overcome or bounce back 
from or adapt to the 
effects of disturbances  
including opportuniti es. 
 Scale of 
resource access  Community -level body using ICTs to access 
assets/resources that are either within the 
immediate community or outside the 
immediate community (focus on assets 
alone) . Farm er group accessing more market  
opportunities and hence i ncome due to the use 
of ICTs.  ICTs enabling the household to access resources 
/assets that are either within the immediate 
community or outside the immediate community 
(focus on assets alone) . Evidence of farmers accessing  market s and 
income  from other districts due to information 
and network s established due to use of ICTs.  
Multi -level  
networks  Community -level body using ICTs to 
connect to networks/resources that are 
outside the immediate community 
allowing for resources to flow  between 
them.  Farmers’ cooperative using mobile phones to 
link (and thus establish network) with 
suppliers/exporters in urban areas.  ICTs enabling households to access networks that 
are new and  outside their community . Farmers using a mobile phone to conn ect with 
exporters’ collection centres, banks and 
further actors and using  this connection to 
acquire external knowledge.  
 
Intra‐level 
networks  Community -level body using ICTs to link up 
with other community -level bodies (within 
the community) to allow  a greater flow of 
resources.  A local NGO within a community using ICTs to 
connect to local farmer cooperati ves and assist 
them with financial knowledge.  ICTs enabling access to networks and individuals 
that are within the community.  Via phone calls with  people within their 
networks, farmers connect with buyers and 
other actors to  access information and  sell 
their produce . 
Diversity & 
Flexibility   
Ability of the 
household/community to 
undertake different 
courses of actions with 
the resources at its 
disposal, while enabling 
them to innovate and 
utilise the opportunities 
that may arise from 
change.  Variety of 
courses of 
action  Community/c ommunity -level body taking 
a variety of actions to combat challenges 
or take advantage of opportunities due to 
information received through ICTs, or 
using ICTs to support those activities.  Farmer  cooperati ve introduces loan services to 
farmers alongside savings by making use of 
mobile money services.  ICTs enabling households to take 
different/additional courses of actions to combat 
challenges or take advantage of opportunities.  Evidence of ICTs enabling farmers to engage in 
additional  off-farm activities.  
Adaptable 
decision‐making  Community/ community -level body making 
informed (better) decision s due to the use 
of ICTs to combat problems or utilise 
opportunities that may arise . Farmer  cooperative  deciding to change where to 
sell their produce due to market information 
received through ICTs.  Household making informed (better) decision s due 
to the u se of ICTs to combat problems or utilise 
opportunities that may arise . With new ICT -delivered  information, farmers 
make better marketing decisions based on 
identification of  higher returns.  
Innovation 
mechanism  ICTs facilitating mechanisms (sub -system) 
through whic h community/community -
level body can  innovate.  A farmer cooperative accessing a website of 
ideas for better marketing . ICTs facilitating mechanisms (sub -system) through 
which household s innovate.  A farmer joining an online learning course 
about  new farming techniques . 
Equality   
 
The extent to which the 
household/community 
provides equal access to 
rights, resources and 
opportunities to its 
members.  
 Equality of 
distribution of 
assets  The use of ICTs in the community or 
community -level body to promote equal 
distributions of assets/resources among 
community members . Evidence of a community -level body responsible 
for land ownership using ICTs to promote 
ownership of land among marginalised groups . ICTs promoting equal balance of ownership and 
access to  assets within households . Evidence of mobile phone s increasing the 
proportion of productive assets owned by 
women within households.  
Inclusiveness 
and 
participation  The use of ICTs to increase 
participation/inclusiveness of community 
or marginalised groups within the 
community, e.g. women . ICT intervention that promotes knowledge of 
women ’s groups  in communities/villages.  The use of ICTs that increases 
participation/inclusiveness of households or 
household members.  The use of mobile money  services that 
increases financial inclusion of  women in  rural 
households.  
Openness and 
accountability  The use of ICTs to increase openness and 
accountability in the community or 
community -level body . The use of ICTs in a community -level body to 
promote openness by reporting  its activities to 
farmers.  The use of ICTs to increase openness and 
accountability with in the household.  The use of ICTs to promote openness of 
household spending, e.g. using shared mobile 
money servic es. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
59 
 References  
Adger,  W. (2003).  Social  capital,  collective  action,  and adaptation  to climate  change,  
Economic  Geography , 79(4),  387-404.  
Ajwang,  F. O. (2014).  Market  in their  palms?:  exploring  smallholder  farmers’  use of mobile  
phone  farming  applications  and their  effect  on the farmers’  farming,  marketing  and well-
being:  a case  study  of selected  counties  in Kenya . MPhil.  Massey  University : Palmerston 
North, New Zealand . [1] 
Aker,  J. C., & Ksoll,  C. (2016).  Can mobile  phones  improve  agricultural  outcomes?  Evidence  
from  a randomized  experiment  in Niger,  Food  Policy , 60, 44-51. [2] 
Aker,  J. C., & Mbiti,  I. M. (2010).  Mobile  phones  and economic  development  in Africa,  
Journal  of Economic  Perspectives , 24(3),  207-32. 
Ali, J., & Kumar,  S. (2011).  Information  and communication  technologies  (ICTs)  and farmers’  
decision -making  across  the agricultural  supply  chain,  International  Journal  of 
Information  Management , 31(2),  149-159.  [3] 
Arinloye,  D. D. A., Linnemann,  A. R., Hagelaar,  G., Coulibaly,  O., & Omta,  O. S. (2015).  Taking  
profit  from  the growing  use of mobile  phone  in Benin:  a contingent  valuation  approach  
for market  and quality  information  access,  Information  Technology  for Development , 
21(1),  44-66. [4] 
Asongu,  S. A., Nwachukwu,  J. C., & Orim,  S. M. I. (2018).  Mobile  phones,  institutional  quality  
and entrepreneurship  in Sub-Saharan  Africa,  Technological  Forecasting  and Social  
Change , 131,  183-203.  
Baardewijk,  M. (2017).  The impact  of mobile  phone  use and IKSL’s  audio  messages  on the 
asset  base  of poor  farmers  in Lucknow,  India,  The Electronic  Journal  of Information  
Systems  in Developing  Countries , 79(1),  1-17. [5] 
Baird,  T. D., & Hartter,  J. (2017).  Livelihood  diversification,  mobile  phones  and information  
diversity  in northern  Tanzania,  Land  Use Policy , 67, 460-471.  [6] 
Baliwada,  H., Gills,  R., & Sharma,  J. P. (2014).  ‘Clima te resilient technologies for sustainable 
agricultu re’, in Shukla,  J. P. (ed.)  Technologies  for sustainable  rural  development:  having  
potential  of socio -economic  upliftment.  Allied  Publishers:  New  Delhi,  India,  pp. 256- 263.  
Batista,  C., & Vicente,  P. C. (2017).  Improving  access  to savings  through  mobile  money:  
experimental  evidence  from  smallholder  farmers  in Mozambique , NOVAAFRICA  Working  
Paper  no. 1705.  Nova  School  of Business  and Economics,  Nova  University  of Lisbon:  
Lisbon, Portugal.  [7] 
Baumüller,  H. (2015).  Assessing  the role of mobile  phones  in offering  price  information  and 
market  linkages:  the case  of M‐Farm  in Kenya,  The Electronic  Journal  of Information  
Systems  in Developing  Countries , 68(1),  1-16. [8] 
Baumüller,  H. (2018).  The little  we know:  an exploratory  literature  review  on the utility  of 
mobile  phone‐enabled  services  for smallholder  farmers,  Journal  of International  
Development , 30(1),  134-154.  
Belal,  A., El-Ramady,  H., Mohamed,  E., & Saleh,  A. (2014).  Drought  risk assessment  using  
remote  sensing  and GIS techniques,  Arabian  Journal  of Geosciences , 7(1),  35–53. 
Bender,  D. R. (1967).  A refinement  of the concept  of household:  families,  co‐residence,  and 
domestic  functions,  American  Anthropologist , 69(5),  493-504.  
Béné,  C. (2013).  Towards  a quantifiable  measure  of resilience , IDS Working  Paper  volume  
2013  number  434.  Institute  of Development  Studies:  Brighton,  UK. Available  at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040 -0209.2013.00434.x . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
60 
 Béné,  C., Al-Hassan,  R. M., Amarasinghe,  O., Fong,  P., Ocran,  J., Onumah,  E., Ratuniatad,  R., 
Truong  Van Tuyene,  T. R, McGregor  J. A., & Mills,  D. J. (2016).  Is resilience  socially  
constructed?  Empirical  evidence  from  Fiji, Ghana,  Sri Lanka,  and Vietnam , Global  
Environmental Ch ange , 38, 153-170.  
Berkes,  F., & Ross,  H. (2013).  Community  resilience:  toward  an integrated  approach,  Society  
& Natural  Resources , 26(1),  5-20. 
Boettiger,  S., Toyama,  K., & Abed,  R. (2012).  Natural  obsolescence  of village  phone,  
Proceedings  of the Fifth  International  Conference  on Information  and Communication  
Technologies  and Development,  Atlanta,  Georgia,  USA.  12-15 March  2012 . ACM.  pp. 
221-229.  Available  at: 10.1145/2160673.2160702 . 
Boland,  A., Cherry,  G., & Dickson,  R. (2017).  Doing  a systematic  review:  a student’s  guide . 
2nd edn.  Sage:  London.  
Brown, K. (2015).  Resilience, development and global change . Routledge: Abingdon, UK.  
Brown,  K., & Westaway,  E. (2011).  Agency,  capacity,  and resilience  to environmental  
change:  lessons  from  human  development,  well-being,  and disasters,  Annual  Review  of 
Environment  and Resources , 36, 321-342.  
Bukenya, B., & Yanguas, P. (2013). Building state capacity for inclusive development: the 
politics of public sector reform , ESID working paper no. 25. ESID, University of 
Manchester: Manchester, UK.  
Burrell,  J., & Oreglia,  E. (2015).  The myth  of market  price  information:  mobile  phones  and 
the application  of economic  knowledge  in ICTD,  Economy  and Society , 44(2),  271-292.  
Carmody,  P. (2013).  A knowledge  economy  or an information  society  in Africa?  
Thintegration  and the mobile  phone  revolution,  Information  Technology  for 
Development , 19(1),  24-39. 
Chambers,  R. (1997).  Whose  reality  counts? :  putting  the first last. Intermediate  Technology  
Publications:  London.  
Checkland,  P. (1981).  Systems  thinking,  systems  practice . Wiley:  Chichester , UK. 
Cole,  S., & Fernando,  A. N. (2012).  The value  of advice:  evidence  from  mobile  phone -based  
agricultural  extension , Harvard  Business  School  working  paper  no 13-047.  Harvard  
Business  School,  Harvard  University:  Boston, MA . [9] 
CTA.  (2014).  ICTs improving  family  farming:  building  resilience  for family  farming . Technical  
Centre  for Agricultural  and Rural  Cooperation  ACP-EU (CTA):  Wageningen,  Netherlands.  
Dannenberg,  P., & Lakes,  T. (2013).  The use of mobile  phones  by Kenyan  export -orientated  
small -scale  farmers:  insights  from  fruit  and vegetable  farming  in the Mt. Kenya  region,  
Economia  Agro -Alimentare , 15(3),  55-75. [10] 
Deloitte.  (2012).  E-transform  Africa:  agriculture  sector  study:  sector  assessment  and 
opportunities  for ICT. Deloitte : New York, NY . Available  at: 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTINFORMATIONANDCOMMUNICATIONANDTECH
NOLOG IES/Resources/282822 -1346223280837/Agriculture_FullReport.pdf . 
Dey,  B. L., Prendergast,  R., & Newman,  D. (2008).  How  can ICTs be used  and appropriated  to 
address  agricultural  information  needs  of Bangladeshi  farmers?,  GlobDev  2008 , 21. [11] 
Douxchamps,  S., Debevec,  L., Giordano,  M., & Barron,  J. (2017).  Monitoring  and evaluation  
of climate  resilience  for agricultural  development –A review  of currently  available  tools,  
World  Development  Perspectives , 5, 10-23. 
Duncombe,  R. (2006).  Analysing  ICT applications  for poverty  reduction  via microenterprise  
using  the livelihoods  framework,  Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no. 27. Centre  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
61 
 for Development  Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester, UK. Available  at: 
https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/di -wp27/ . 
Duncombe,  R. (2014).  Understanding  the impact  of mobile  phones  on livelihoods  in 
developing  countries,  Deve lopment  Policy  Review , 32(5),  567-588.  
Duncombe,  R. (2016).  Mobile  phones  for agricultural  and rural  development:  a literature  
review  and suggestions  for future  research,  The European  Journal  of Development  
Research , 28(2),  213-235.  
Folke,  C., Carpenter,  S., Walker,  B., Scheffer,  M., Chapin,  T., & Rockström,  J. (2010).  
Resilience  thinking:  integrating  resilience,  adaptability  and transformability,  Ecology  and 
Society , 15(4) , 20. 
Foster,  C., & Heeks,  R. (2013).  Analyzing  policy  for inclusive  innovation:  the mobile  sector  
and base -of-the-pyramid  markets  in Kenya,  Innovation  and Development , 3(1),  103-119.  
Fu, X., & Akter,  S. (2016).  The impact  of mobile  phone  technology  on agricultural  extension  
services  delivery:  evidence  from  India,  The Journal  of Development  Studies , 52(11),  
1561 -1576.  [12] 
Furuholt,  B., & Matotay,  E. (2011).  The developmental  contribution  from  mobile  phones  
across  the agricultural  value  chain  in rural  Africa,  The Electronic  Journal  of Information  
Systems  in Developing  Countries , 48(1),  1-16. [13] 
Garcia,  V.B.S.  & Fan,  Q. (2015).  Information  access  and smallholder  farmers’  selling  decisions  
in Peru,  Agricultural  & Applied  Economics  Association  2015  conference , San Francisco,  
CA. 26-28 July 2015.  Available  at: https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/205380/ . 
Goyal,  A. (2010).  Information,  direct  access  to farmers,  and rural  market  performance  in 
central  India,  American  Economic  Journal , 2(3),  22-45. 
Grothmann,  T., & Patt,  A. (2005).  Adaptive  capacity  and human  cognition:  the process  of 
individual  adaptation  to climate  change,  Global  Environmental Ch ange , 15(3),  199-213.  
GSMA.  (2018).  The mobile  economy : Sub-Saharan  Africa  2018 . GSMA:  London.  Available  at: 
https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=809c442550e5487f3b1d025fdc70e23
b&download . 
Gyan,  S. (2018).  Exploring  uses  of mobile  phones  in pineapple  production  and its livelihood  
benefits  for Farmers  in Akwapim  south  district,  Ghana . BSc. Ashesi  University  College : 
Berekuso, Ghana . [14] 
Hallegatte, S., Vogt -Schilb, A., Bangalore, M., & Rozenberg, J. (2017).  Unbreakable: building 
the resilienc e of the poor in the face of natural disasters . World Bank: Washington, DC.  
Haworth,  B., Biggs,  E., Duncan,  J., Wales,  N., Boruff,  B., & Bruce,  E. (2018).  Geographic  
information  and communication  technologies  for supporting  smallholder  agriculture  and 
climate  resilience,  Climate , 6(4),  97. 
Heeks,  R. & Molla,  A. (2009).  Impact  assessment  of ICT-for-development  projects:  a 
compendium  of approaches , Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no. 36. Centre  for 
Development  Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester,  UK. Available  at: 
https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/di -wp36/ . 
Heeks,  R. (2010).  Do information  and communication  technologies  (ICTs)  contribute  to 
development?,  Journal  of International Develo pment , 22(5),  625-640.  
Heeks,  R. (2014a).  From  the MDGS  to the post -2015  agenda:  analysing  changing  
development  priorities , Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no. 56. Centre  for 
Development  Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester, UK. Available  at: 
https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/di -wp56/ . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
62 
 Heeks,  R. (2014b).  Future  priorities  for development  informatics  research  from  the post -2015  
development  agenda , Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no. 57. Centre  for 
Development  Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester, UK. Available  at: 
https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/di -wp57/ . 
Heeks,  R. (2016).  Examining  “digital  development”:  the shape  of things  to come?,  
Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no. 64. Centre  for Development  Informatics,  
University  of Manchester:  Manchester,  UK. Available  at: 
https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/d i-wp64/ . 
Heeks , R. (2018).  Information  and communication  technology  for development  (ICT4D) . 
Taylor  and Francis:  London.  
Heeks, R. & Krishna, S. (2016). ICTs and hope for development: a theoretical framework, The 
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries , 77(4), 1 -19. 
Heeks,  R., & Ospina,  A. V. (2012).  ICTs,  climate  change  and development:  themes  and 
strategic  actions . Centre  for Development  Informatics:  Manchester,  UK. 
Heeks,  R., & Ospina,  A.V. (2015).  Analysing  urban  community  informatics  from  a resilience  
perspective,  Journal  of Community  Informatics , 11(1),  1-14. 
Heeks,  R., & Ospina,  A.V. (2016a).  Benchmarking,  visualising  and strengthening  ICTs’ impact  
on urban  community  resilience:  a Ugandan  case  study . Centre  for Development  
Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester,  UK. 
Heeks,  R., & Ospina,  A.V. (2016b).  Benchmarking,  visualising  and strengthening  ICTs’ impact  
on urban  community  resilience:  a Costa  Rica  case  study . Centre  for Development  
Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester,  UK. 
Heeks,  R., & Ospina,  A.V. (2019).  Conceptualising  the link between  information  systems  and 
resilience:  a developing  country  field  study,  Information  Systems  Journal , 29(1),  70-96. 
Heeks, R. &  Shekhar, S. (2019a) Analysing urban platforms and inequality through a 
“platform justice” lens, paper presented at international workshop on Urban Platforms 
and the Future City , University of Manchester, 28 Feb -1 Mar  
Heeks, R. & Shekhar, S. (2019b). Dataf ication, development and marginalised urban 
communities: an applied data justice framework, Information, Communication & Society , 
22(7), 992 -1011.  
High,  C., Pelling,  M., & Nemes,  G. (2005).  Understanding  informal  institutions:  networks  and 
communities  in rural  development, Transition  in Agriculture,  Agricultural  Economics  in 
Transition  II, Budapest,  Hungary.  28-29 October  2005.  Institute  of Economics,  Hungarian  
Academy  of Sciences.  pp. 1-20. Available  at: http://o ro.open.ac.uk/2683/ . 
Hurrelmann,  K. (1988).  Social  structure  and personality  development:  the individual  as a 
productive  processor  of reality . Cambridge  University  Press:  Cambridge,  UK. 
Jack,  W., & Suri,  T. (2011).  Mobile  money:  the economics  of M-PESA , NBER  working  paper  
no. 16721.  National  Bureau  of Economic  Research:  Cambridge,  USA.  Available  at: 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w16721 . 
Jimenez,  D., & Ramirez -Villegas,  J. (2018).  “Unlocking  big data’s  potential  to strengthen  
farmers’  resilience:  the platform  for big data  in agriculture”,  in Ospina,  A.V. (ed.)  Big 
data for resilience  storybook:  experiences  integrating  big data  into resilience  
programming . International  Institute  for Sustainable  Development:  Winnipeg , MB, pp. 
97-108.  
Jones, L., & Tanner, T. (2017). ‘Subjective resilience’: using perceptions to quantify 
household resilience to  climate extremes and disasters,  Regional Environmental 
Change , 17(1), 229 -243.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
63 
 Kanbur, R., & Venables, A. J. (e ds.). (2005).  Spatial inequality and development . Oxford 
University Press: Oxford, UK.  
Khabsa,  M., & Giles,  C. L. (2014).  The number  of scholarly  documents  on the public  web,  
PloS  One, 9(5).  
Kiiza,  B., & Pederson,  G. (2012).  ICT-based  market  information  and adoption  of agricultural  
seed  technologies:  insights  from  Uganda,  Telecommunications  Policy , 36(4),  253-259.  
[15] 
Kikulwe,  E. M., Fischer,  E., & Qaim,  M. (2014).  Mobile  money,  smallholder  farmers,  and 
household  welfare  in Kenya,  PloS  One, 9(10).  [16] 
Kimhi, S. (2016). Levels of resilience: associations among individual, community, and 
national resilience.  Journal of Health Psychology , 21(2), 164 -170.  
Kirui,  O. K., Okello,  J. J., Nyikal,  R. A., & Njiraini,  G. W. (2013).  Impact  of mobile  phone -based  
money  transfer  services  in agriculture:  evidence  from  Kenya,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
International  Agriculture , 52(892 -2016 -65177),  141-162.  [17] 
Krone,  M., Dannenberg,  P., & Nduru,  G. (2016).  The use of modern  information  and 
communication  technologies  in smallholder  agriculture:  examples  from  Kenya  and 
Tanzania,  Information  Development , 32(5),  1503 -1512.  [18] 
Labonne,  J., & Chase,  R. S. (2009).  The power  of information:  the impact  of mobile  phones  on 
farmers’  welfare  in the Philippines , Policy  Research  Working  Paper  no. 4996.  The World  
Bank:  Washington,  DC. [19] 
Lee, K. H., & Bellemare,  M. F. (2013).  Look  who’s  talking:  the impacts  of the intrahousehold  
allocation  of mobile  phones  on agricultural  prices,  The Journal  of Development  Studies , 
49(5),  624-640.  
Levine,  S. (2014).  Assessing  resilience:  why quantification  misses  the point , HPG  Working  
Paper.  Overseas  Development  Institute:  London,  UK. Available  at: 
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi -assets/publications -opinion -
files/9049.pdf . 
Lewis,  A. L., Baird,  T. D., & Sorice,  M. G. (2016).  Mobile  phone use and human –wildlife  
conflict  in northern  Tanzania,  Environmental  Management , 58(1),  117-129.  [20] 
Lipper, L., McCarthy, N., Zilberman, D., Asfaw, S., & Branca, G. (eds.). (2018).  Climate smart 
agriculture: building resilience to climate change . Spri nger: Cham.  
Loudon,  M. (2016).  A platform  studies  approach  to the role of technology  in the ICTD  
ecosystem:  the SMS  in M4D  interventions,  Information  Technology  for Development , 
22(sup1),  7-25. 
Lwasa,  S., Asingwire,  N., Okello,  J. J., & Kiwanuka,  J. (2011).  Awareness  of ICT-based  projects  
and the intensity  of use of mobile  phones  among  smallholder  farmers  in Uganda:  the 
case  of Mayuge  and Apac  districts,  International  Journal  of ICT Research  and 
Development  in Africa , 2(2),  26-38. 
Lwoga,  E. T. (2010).  Bridging  the agricultural  knowledge  and information  divide:  the case  of 
selected  telecenters  and rural  radio  in Tanzania,  The Electronic  Journal  of Information  
Systems  in Developing  Countries , 43(1),  1-14. [21] 
Manfre,  C., & Nordehn,  C. (2013).  Exploring  the promise  of information  and communication  
technologies  for women  farmers  in Kenya,  Cultural  Practice , 1-10. [22] 
Martin,  B. L., & Abbott,  E. (2011).  Mobile  phones  and rural  livelihoods:  diffusion,  uses,  and 
perceived  impacts  among  farmers  in rural  Uganda,  Information  Technologies  & 
International  Development , 7(4),  17-34. [23] Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
64 
 Masuka,  B., Matenda,  T., Chipomho,  J., Mapope,  N., Mupeti,  S., Tatsvarei,  S., & Ngezimana,  
W. (2016).  Mobile  phone  use by small -scale  farmers:  a potential  to transform  production  
and marketing  in Zimbabwe,  South  African  Journal  of Agricultural  Extension , 44(2),  121-
135.  [24] 
Masuki,  K. F. G., Kamugisha,  R., Mowo,  J. G., Tanui,  J., Tukahirwa,  J., Mogoi,  J., & Adera,  E. O. 
(2010,  March).  Role  of mobile  phones  in improving  communication  and information  
delivery  for agricultural  development:  lessons  from  South  Western  Uganda , 
International  Federation  for Information  Processing  (IFIP),  Technical  Commission  9 – 
Relationship  Between  Computers  and Society , Makerere  University,  Uganda.  22-23 
March  2010.  Available  at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260402865 . [25] 
Matuha,  M. (2015).  Mobile  phone  use in Ugandan  aquaculture:  farmer  experiences  and 
aspirations . MSc.  Auburn  University : Auburn, AL . [26] 
Mittal,  S. (2015).  Mobile  phones  based  agro -advisories  role in gender  empowerment,  2015  
Conference , Milan,  Italy.  9-14 August  2015.  Available  at: 
https://ideas.repec.org/p/ags/iaae15/212467.html . [30] 
Mittal,  S., & Mehar,  M. (2012).  How  mobile  phones  contribute  to growth  of small  farmers?  
Evidence  from  India,  Quarterly  Journal  of International  Agriculture , 51(892 -2016 -65169),  
227-244.  [29] 
Mittal,  S., & Tripathi,  G. (2009).  Role  of mobile  phone  technology  in improving  small  farm  
productivity,  Agricultural  Economics  Research  Review , 22(347 -2016 -16874),  451-460.  
[27] 
Mittal,  S., Gandhi,  S., & Tripathi,  G. (2010).  Socio -economic  impact  of mobile  phones  on 
Indian  agriculture,  Working  paper  no. 246.  Indian  Council  for Research  on International  
Economic  Relations:  New  Delhi,  India.  [28] 
Mohamad,  M. R. A., & Gombe,  M. I. (2017).  e-Agriculture  revisited:  a systematic  literature  
review  of theories,  concept,  practices,  methods,  and future  trends,  British  Academy  of 
Management  Annual  Conference , Warwick  Business  School,  UK. 5-7 September  2017.  
Available  at: http://usir.salford.ac.uk/i d/eprint/43648/ . 
Moher,  D., Liberati,  A., Tetzlaff,  J., & Altman,  D. G. (2009).  Preferred  reporting  items  for 
systematic  reviews  and meta -analyses:  the PRISMA  statement,  Annals  of Internal  
Medicine , 151(4),  264-269.  
Molony,  T. (2006).  "I don’t  trust  the phone;  it always  lies":  trust and information  and 
communication  technologies  in Tanzanian  micro -and small  enterprises,  Information  
Technologies  & International  Development , 3(4),  67-83. 
Molony,  T. (2008).  Running  out of credit:  the limitations  of mobile  telephony  in a Tanzanian  
agricultural  marketing  system,  The Journal  of Modern  African  Studies , 46(4),  637-658.  
Mtega,  W. P., & Msungu,  A. C. (2013).  Using  information  and communication  technologies  
for enhancing  the accessibility  of agricultural  information  for improved  agricultural  
production  in Tanzania,  The Electronic  Journal  of Information  Systems  in Developing  
Countries , 56(1),  1-14. [31] 
Muktar,  B. G., Man,  N., Kamaruzzaman,  N. H., Samah,  A. A., & Umar,  S. (2018a).  Fishers  ICTs 
use for early  warning  reception,  it’s effect  on livelihood  resilience  and sustainability  in 
east  coast  Malaysia,  Journal  of Agriculture  and Veterinary  Science,  11(1),  63-72. 
Muktar,  B. G., Man,  N., Saleh,  J. M., & Daneji,  M. I. (2018b).  Evaluation  of ICTs access,  use 
and preferences  for livelihood  resilience:  results  from  a survey  of Malaysian  fisher  folks,  
The Journal  of Agricultural  Education  and Extension , 24(4),  377-388.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
65 
 Munyegera,  G. K., & Matsumoto,  T. (2016).  Mobile  money,  remittances,  and household  
welfare:  panel  evidence  from  rural  Uganda,  World  Development , 79, 127-137.  [32] 
Murphy,  J. T., & Carmody,  P. (2015).  Africa’s  information  revolution:  technical  regimes  and 
production  networks  in South  Africa  and Tanzania . John  Wiley  & Sons:  Chichester,  UK. 
Muto,  M., & Yamano,  T. (2009).  The impact  of mobile  phone  coverage  expansion  on market  
participation:  panel  data  evidence  from  Uganda,  World  Development , 37(12),  1887 -
1896.  [33] 
Mwakaje,  A. G. (2010).  Information  and communication  technology  for rural  farmers  market  
access  in Tanzania,  Journal  of Information  Technology  Impact , 10(2),  111-128.  [34] 
Mwantimwa,  K. (2019).  Use of mobile  phones  among  agro -pastoralist  communities  in 
Tanzania,  Information  Development , 35(2),  230-244.  [35] 
Ogbeide,  O. A., & Ele, I. (2015).  Smallholder  farmers  and mobile  phone  technology  in Sub-
Sahara  agriculture,  Mayfair  Journal  of Information  and Technology  Management  in 
Agriculture , 1(1),  1-19.  [36] 
Ogunniyi,  M. D., & Ojebuyi,  B. R. (2016).  Mobile  phone  use for agribusiness  by farmers  in 
Southwest  Nigeria,  Journal  of Agricultural  Extension , 20(2),  172-187.  [37] 
Oliver,  S.R.,  Rees,  R.W.,  Clarke‐Jones,  L., Milne,  R., Oakley,  A.R.,  Gabbay,  J., Stein,  K., 
Buchanan,  P. and Gyte,  G. (2008).  A multidimensional  conceptual  framework  for 
analysing  public  involvement  in health  services  research,  Health  Expectations , 11(2),  
204-204.  
Ospina, A.V. (2013). Climate change adaptation and developing country livelihoods: the role 
of information and communication technologies . PhD. University of Man chester : 
Manchester, UK . 
Ospina,  A. V., Heeks,  R., Camacho,  K., Calvo,  M., Zúñiga,  V., Barrios,  P., & Rojas,  I. (2016).  
Benchmarking  urban  community  resilience:  piloting  the Resilience  Assessment  
Benchmarking  and Impact  Toolkit  (RABIT)  in Costa  Rica.  Centre  for Development  
Informatics,  University  of Manchester:  Manchester,  UK. Available at: 
http://www.niccd.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/11/RABITCostaRicaFullCaseStudy.pdf   
Ospina,  A.V. & Heeks,  R. (2010).  Linking  ICTs and climate  change  adaptation:  a conceptual  
framework  for e-resilience  and e-adaptation . Centre  for Development  Informatics:  
Manchester,  UK. Available  at: 
https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/files/33529974/FULL_TEXT.PDF . 
Ospina,  A.V. & Heeks,  R. (2016).  Resilience  Assessment  Benchm arking  And Impact  Toolkit  
(RABIT):  implementation  handbook . Centre  for Development  Informatics,  University  of 
Manchester:  Manchester,  UK.  Available at: http://www.niccd.org/wp -
content/uploads/2017/11/RABITHandbookV1a.pdf   
Ozor,  N. (2015).  Improving  agricultural  productivity  and resilience  to climate  change  using  
the Land  Potential  Knowledge  System  (LandPKS)  mobile  technology . Technical  Centre  for 
Agricult ural and Rural  Cooperation  (CTA):  Wageningen,  Netherlands.  
Ozor,  N., Acheampong,  E. N., Herrick,  J., & Beh,  A. (2015).  Using  the Land  Potential  
Knowledge  System  (LandPKS)  mobile  technology  for agricultural  productivity  and 
resilience . African  Technology  Policy  Studies  Network:  Nairobi,  Kenya.  
Phillips,  J. (2003).  ‘Determinants  of forecast  use among  communal  farmers  in Zimbabwe’,  in 
O’Brien,  K. & Vogel,  C. (eds.)  Coping  with  variability:  the use of seasonal  climate  
forecasts  in southern  Africa . Ashgate:  Farnham,  UK.  pp. 110-28. 
Pieterse,  J. N. (2010).  Development  theory . 2nd edn.  Sage  Publications:  London.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
66 
 Piontak,  R. (2012).  Calling  for better  crops:  an exploration  of social  upgrading  through  two 
mobile  phone -based  agriculture  extension  projects  in Uganda . MPhil.  University  of Cape  
Town : Cape Town South Africa . [38] 
Pretty, J. N. (2003). Social capital an d connectedness: i ssues and implications for agriculture, 
rural development and natural resource management in ACP countries . CTA: 
Wageningen , Netherlands . 
Quandt, A. (2018). Measuring livelihood resilience: the household livelihood resilience 
approach (HLRA).  World Development , 107, 253 -263.  
Roberts,  E., Farrington,  J., & Skerratt,  S. (2015).  Evaluating  new  digital  technologies  through  
a framewo rk of resilience,  Scottish  Geographical  Journal , 131(3 -4), 253-264.  
Salia,  M., Nsowah‐Nuamah,  N. N., & Steel,  W. F. (2011).  Effects  of mobile  phone  use on 
artisanal  fishing  market  efficiency  and livelihoods  in Ghana,  The Electronic  Journal  of 
Information  Systems  in Developing  Countries , 47(1),  1-26. [39] 
Sambasivan,  N., Azad,  G., Aoki,  P. M., & Mitra,  S. S. (2016).  We call it hi-fi: exposing  Indian  
households  to high  speed  broadband  wireless  internet,  Proceedings  of the Eighth  
International  Conference  on Information  and Communication  Technologies  and 
Development , Michigan,  USA.  3-6 June  2016.  Available  at: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909651 . 
Scott,  M. (2013).  Resilience:  a conceptual  lens for rural studies?,  Geography  Compass , 7(9),  
597-610.  
Sekabira,  H., & Qaim,  M. (2017a).  Mobile  money,  agricultural  marketing,  and off‐farm  
income  in Uganda,  Agricultural  Economics , 48(5),  597-611.  [40] 
Sekabira,  H., & Qaim,  M. (2017b).  Can mobile  phones  improve  gender  equality  and 
nutrition?  Panel  data  evidence  from  farm  households  in Uganda,  Food  Policy , 73, 95-
103.  [41] 
Sen,  A. (1999).  Development  as freedom . Oxford  University  Press:  Oxford , UK. 
Sewell,  W. H. (1992).  A theory  of structure:  duality,  agency,  and transformation,  American  
Journal  of Sociology , 98(1),  1-29. 
Shaffril,  H. A., Omar,  S. Z., D’Silva,  J. L., & Bolong,  J. (2015).  Mapping  the patterns  of mobile  
phone  usage  among  fishermen  in Malaysia,  Information  Technology  for Development , 
21(4),  543-554.  [42] 
Shilling,  C. (1992).  Reconceptualising  structure  and agency  in the sociology  of education:  
structuration  theory  and schooling,  British  Journal  of Sociology  of Education , 13(1),  69-
87. 
Sife,  A. S., Kiondo,  E., & Lyimo‐Macha,  J. G. (2010).  Contribution  of mobile  phones  to rural  
livelihoods  and poverty  reduction  in Morogoro  region,  Tanzania,  The Electronic  Journal  
of Information  Systems  in Developing  Countries , 42(1),  1-15. [43] 
Sina, D., Chang -Richards, A. Y., Wilkinson, S., &  Potangaroa, R. (2019). A conceptual 
framework for measuring livelihood resilience: relocation experience from Aceh, 
Indonesia.  World Development , 117, 253 -265.  
Smith, L. C., & Frankenberger, T. R. (2018). Does resilience capacity reduce the negative 
impac t of shocks on household food security?  World Development , 102, 358 -376.  
Tadesse,  G., & Bahiigwa,  G. (2015).  Mobile  phones  and farmers’  marketing  decisions  in 
Ethiopia,  World  Development , 68, 296-307.  [44] 
Tenhunen, S. (2008). Mobile technology in the village: ICTs, culture, and social logistics in 
India.  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , 14(3), 515 -534.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 84  
67 
 Thiede, B. (2016). Resilience and development among ultra -poor households in rural 
Ethiopia,  Resilience , 4(1), 1 -13. 
Thomas,  J., & Harden , A. (2008).  Methods  for the thematic  synthesis  of qualitative  research  
in systematic  reviews,  BMC  Medical Research Met hodology , 8(1).  
Torero,  M. (2014).  Information  and communication  technologies:  farmers,  markets,  and the 
power  of connectivity . International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute:  Washington,  DC. 
Available  at: http://www.ifpri.org/publication/information -and-communication -
technologies -farmers -markets -and-power -connectivity . 
Verma,  H., Moder,  F., & Shaik,  Z. H. (2017).  Crafting  climate  resilience  for people  at bottom  
of pyramid  using  digital  innovation,  International  Journal  of Environmental  Science  and 
Development , 8(10),  742-747.  
Walsham,  G. (2017).  ICT4D  research:  reflections  on history  and future  agenda,  Information  
Technology  for Development , 23(1),  18-41. 
Westermann,  O., Förch,  W., Thornton,  P., Körner,  J., Cramer,  L., & Campbell,  B. (2018).  
Scaling  up agricultural  interventions:  case studies  of climate -smart  agriculture,  
Agricultural  Systems , 165,  283-293.  
Wilson, G. (2010). Multifunctional ‘quality’and rural community resilience.  Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers , 35(3), 364 -381.  
Wilson,  G. (2012).  Community  resilience,  globalization,  and transitional  pathways  of 
decision -making,  Geoforum , 43(6),  1218 -1231.  
World  Bank.  (2012).  The transformational  use of information  and communication  
technologies  in Africa . World  Bank:  Washington,  DC. 
World  Bank.  (2014).  ICT as an enabler of tra nsformation  in Ethiopia . World  Bank:  
Washington,  DC. 
World  Bank.  (2018).  The role of digital  identification  in agriculture:  emerging  applications.  
World  Bank:  Washington,  DC. 
Wyche,  S., Simiyu,  N., & Othieno,  M. E. (2016).  Mobile  phones  as amplifiers  of social  
inequality  among  rural  Kenyan  women,  ACM  Transactions  on Computer -Human  
Interaction , 23(3),  1-19. 
Zanello,  G. (2012).  Mobile  phones  and radios:  effects  on transactions  costs  and market  
participation  for households  in northern  Ghana,  Journal  of Agricultural  Economics , 63(3),  
694-714.  [45] 
Zhao,  Y., Li S., Zhang  Y. (2005).  ‘Early  detection  and monitoring  of drought  and flood  in China  
using  remote  sensing  and GIS’,  in Sivakumar  M.V.,  Motha  R.P.,  Das H.P. (eds.)  Natural  
disasters  and extreme  events  in agriculture . Springer:  Berlin . pp.305 -317.  
Zheng,  Y., Hatakka,  M., Sahay,  S., & Andersson,  A. (2018).  Conceptualizing  development  in 
information  and communication  technology  for development  (ICT4D),  Information  
Technology  for Development , 24(1),  1-14. 
 