152Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019Vol. 38(2), pp.152-170,Dec.2019
ISSN 1821 -536X (print)
ISSN 2619 -8789 (electronic )Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology
Copyright © 2019 College of Engineering and
Technology, University of Dar es Salaam
Full Length Research Paper
Integrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of
HIV/AIDS Healthcare Information in Tanzania
Ibrahim A. Mwammenywa1*, Michael H. Nkotagu2,3andShubi F. Kaijage2
1University of Dar es Salaam , Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
2Nelson Mandela –African Institution of Science and Technology, Arusha, Tanzania.
3Ardhi University, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
*Corresponding Author: a.m.ibra90@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
This study aims to develop an integrated e -health platform for enhancing delivery of
HIV/AIDS healthcare information in Tanzania , whichconsists of a mobile application and a
web-based system. The study is based on the system's functional and non -functional
requirements for an e -health system for del ivery of HIV/AIDS healthcare information. The
Rapid Application Development (RAD) model was adopted during the system developmen t.
The system requirements were modelled into Data Flow Diagram (DFD) in order to obtain
the clear flow of the HIV/AIDS healthca re information between the clients and HIV/AIDS
healthcare practitioners. With the use of different software development tools and
environment such as Android studio and Symfony framework; both android application and
web-based system were developed. Final ly, the developed system was tested for individual
module functioning as well as the functioning of the fully integrated system. The user
acceptance survey gave the mean score of above 4 on the scale of 5 for each tested aspect of
the system. These scores show that the developed system was positively accepted by the
users and commended the Ministry of Healthandto deploy the system for enhanced delivery
of HIV/AIDS healthcare information.
Keywords :Electronic Health (e -health), HIV/AIDS Healthcare Inform ation,Mobile
Application, Mobile Health (m -Health),Web-based System .
INTRODUCTION
TheGovernment of Tanzanian has taken
necessary socio -political and economic
measures to fight against the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. These measures include free
provision of all HIV/AIDS healthcare
services such as provision of free
counselling, HIV testing services as well
as Antiretroviral therapy (ART) in public
hospitals (The Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2016; Bor et
al.,2013). However, most people are held
back from freely accessing theseHIV/AIDS related services from
HIV/AIDS Care and Treatment Centers
(CTCs) due to fear of stigma (Saki et al.,
2015; Feyissa et al.,2012; Mbonu et al.,
2009).
In an on-going war against stigma towards
people in need of acces sing HIV/AIDS
healthcare services; Lwoga et al.(2017)
recommended that the HIV/AIDS public
healthcare providers and the HIV/AIDS
CTCs use an electronic platform to provide
confidential access to relevant and formal
HIV/AIDS healthcare information. TheIbrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2), Dec. 201 9153Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT), being an electronic
platform, brings about a great potential in
enhancing the delivery of healthcare
services including those for HIV/AIDS.
The increasing deployment of ICT
solutions such as mobile communica tion
technologies has opened the possibility of
improving the delivery of so much
important information to many people, at
the same time without compromising their
confidentiality. Mobile technology has
been of different forms such as mobile
money transact ions, mobile health (m -
health), mobile security and control
systems, and mobile banking and
commerce. In particular, m -health
applications have been growing fast
recently, improving availability of
healthcare services, health information,
and influencing h ealthy user behaviour
(van Genuchten et al.,2012). Thus, mobile
health is expected to contribute in turning
people’s behaviour to reinforce disease
prevention at a low cost of acquiring a
quality healthcare service (van Genuchten
et al.,2012; Qiang et al., 2012; Cole -
Lewis and Kershaw, 201 0; Mechael et al.,
2010).
This research implements the
recommendation made by Lwoga et al.
(2017) of developing an e -health platform
for enhancing the delivery of HIV/AIDS
healthcare information services. With this
e-health platform, an easy, timely and
secured access to relevant HIV/AIDS
healthcare information can be achieved.
People will access the HIV/AIDS
healthcare services such as clinical
counselling, healthcare recommendation
and tips with an enhanced confidentia lity.
The proper usage of the developed
platform can significantly save the
financial and time cost to clients. This is
due to the fact that clients must not have to
physically and frequently visit the
HIV/AIDS CTCs for accessing the
HIV/AIDS healthcare in formation such asHIV/AIDS health tips and clinical
consultation which can also be accessible
through the developed electronic platform
(Mwammenywa and Kaijage, 2018a). This
is so essential in enabling people to access
HIV/AIDS healthcare counselling and
recommendations without being disclosed,
identified and subjected to the stigma and
hence, saving their lives. However, with
such kind of e -health system, the
practitioners will not always have the
physical observations on the clients;
forcing them to give recommendations and
counselling based on the information
received from the client.
METHOD S AND MATERIALS
System Development Approach
In developing the e -health platform for
HIV/AIDS healthcare information
delivery, Software Development Life
Cycle (SDLC) framework was employed.
SDLC is a software development
framework that outlines the tasks
performed at each step in the software
development process (Ragunath et al.,
2010). There are different system
development models with different
characteristics as por trayed in Table 1.
The Rapid Application Development
(RAD) model was adopted from the
requirement acquisition to the system
implementation and testing. It was adopted
in order to hastily deliver the system
within the given timeframe of 6 months, at
a verylow cost. Moreover, RAD provides
the frequent developer -to-customer
communication during the system
development phases, hence it maintains the
customer’s satisfaction (Naz and Khan,
2015; Hirschberg, 2015; Dawson et al.,
2010). Figure 1 illustrates the RA D model
used in this research study .
System Requirements
Requirements for system development of
an integrated mobile and web -basedIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
154Tanzania Journal o f Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019application for delivery of HIV/AIDS
healthcare information are summarized
into functional and non -functional
requirements as was done in a previous
study (Mwammenywa and Kaijage,
2018b). The function requirements given
included the registration and management
of users’ accounts, provision of online
HIV/AIDS clinical consultation, and
online HIV/AIDS healthcare tips andrecommendations. These functional
requirements have been summarized in
Figure 2 showing all the processes which
will be accommodated by the system.
Furthermore, the non -function
requirements were also given including the
need of system security, as well as offer ing
services in both Swahili and English
languages .
Table 1: Comparison between Different System Development Models
ModelFeatures
Financial Cost Time1Functionality2
Waterfall High Long Static System
Incremental High Short Static System
Spiral High Long Dynamic System
RAD Low Short Dynamic and Interactive System
Agile Low Short Dynamic System
Sources: Ismail (2018); Hanafiah and Kasirun (2007).
Figure 1: The System's Rapid Application Development (RAD) Model (Daassnet, 2018).
1Time –the total duration of time taken from the project initiation to its completion (all the stepes involved in
the system development, from requirements gathering all -the-way to the system implementation and testing) .
2Functionality –The i nteractivity of the system’s functionalities such as in static systems where they do not
allow the interactivity with the users; unlike the dynamic system in which their functionalities depend on the
users’ inputs .Ibrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engine ering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2), Dec. 201 9155SystemDesigning
The system design involved mapping of
the system requirements into Data Flow
Diagram (DFD). The following DFD
diagram in Figure 3 shows how the
information will be flowing from one
actor/user to another.
All users must be registered in the system
anduse their correct credentials to access
their profiles , whichare classified based
on their roles such as a client, an
HIV/AIDS practitioner and a system
administrator. The registered client will
usemobile application to make an online
clinical appointmen t and/or participate in
an online clinic session with a HIV/AIDS
health practitioner. Moreover , a client can
access the HIV/AIDS healthcare tips and
recommendation. A HIV/AIDS health
practitioner is not only offering the online
clinical consultation but also,he/she can
post some HIV/AIDS health tips,
recommendations and reminders.  Figure 3
also shows the roles of the system
administrator in providing the technical
support to all users as well as managing
the documents gallery.
SystemImplementation Tools
During the implementation of this
platform, different software development
tools were employed. These tools vary
from the computer programming
languages, database, to integrated
development environment. The following
is the description of system
implement ation tools used in this research
study:
PostgreSQL Database: is an open -
source object -oriented relational
database management system
(ORDBMS) which supports most of
the SQL standard with additional
features. It supports features such as
complex queries, f oreign keys,
triggers, updatable views, transactional
integrity, multi -version concurrencyand control. Furthermore, PostgreSQL
allows developers to add some desired
features such as adding new data -types,
and functions, operators and
procedural languages (Argyridis and
Argialas, 2015). The PostgreSQL was
employed in this study due to its ability
to manage its internal security based on
the user-roles, in additional to its
support of external authentication
mechanism such as password
(supported by the HTTP authentication
in Symfony framework).
Android Studio: the client application
is developed based on the android
operating system. Android was
selected due to its high user penetration
with about 80% market share on the
mobile operating system business
(Statista, 2019). Android is an open -
source mobile operating system for
smart mobile gadgets such as smart
mobile phones and tablets (Reto,
2009). Android Studio was employed
in the implementation of the mobile
application part of this study as shown
in Figure 4. It was used due to its built -
in functionalities and libraries such as
the mobile application web view, maps
and locations which are essential
requirements for this developed
system.
In this study, XML was mainly
employed for developing the user
interfaces in android mobile
application. This was due to it being an
open-source software (free), easier in
offloading and reloading of data to and
from database while maintaining the
desired information and user interface
appearance. With the desired user
interface, the user experience on the
mobile application is improved.
Furthermore, Java was employed for
its core libraries used in implementing
the functionalities and some advanced
User Interface (UI) features in
implementing the android mobile
application on the android studio. ItIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
156Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019simplified the development of some
complex features of the developed
mobile application.
Symfony Framework: is a free PHP
web-application development
framework with a set of PHP
components and libraries (Porebski et
al.,2011; Rades cuet al., 2011).
Symfony framework was used in order
to speed up the implementation of the
web-application. It also helped in
maintenance of the code by replacing
the repeated coding tasks. Moreover,
this framework provides the strong
built-in security fu nctions which not
only provide the HTTP basic
authentication, interactive form login
and/or X.509 certificate login, but alsoallow the implementation of other
authentication features.
JSON: JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) is an open -standard and a
programing language independent file
format that employs human -readable
text to convey data -objects containing
attribute –value pairs and/or array data
types (Bray, 2017; Crockford, 2006). It
supports basic data types such as
number (integers, floats, double),
string, Boolean, array and null. JSON
was used in this system development
for transmitting the array of data from
the mobile application to the web
application to the database. This
simplifies the connection between the
database and the mobile application.
Figure 2: The Process Decomposition Diagram for a Secure e-Health Platform for
HIV/AIDS Healthcare Information DeliveryIbrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019157
Figure 3: Data Flow Diagram for a Secure e -Health Platform for HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information Delivery
WebSocket: is the comm unication
protocol responsible for the full -duplex
communication channels over a TCP
connection. It enables the real -time
interaction between a web -client and a
web-server, doing so; it enables the
real-time data transfer at low
overheads. This is possible as
WebSocket enables the streams of
messages on top of TCP (Pimentel and
Nickerson, 2012; Fette and Melnikov,
2011). It is currently supported by
majority of the browsers such as
Google Chrome, Microsoft Internet
Explorer and Opera for both computers
andsmart mobile phones. The
WebSocket was employed during the
development of real -time
communication module. This moduleis to enable the real -time chatting
communication between the service
client and the HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioners.
Genymotion: Duringimplementation
of the mobile application, the android
simulated phone (Genymotion) was
used. However, during the testing of
the mobile application, different set of
physical gadgets (both mobile phones
and tablets) running Android OS were
used. The mobile application
development put a limit at the android
version 5 (Lollipop) to accommodate
those with lower version even though
the least currently supported version is
android version 7 (Nougat). The
hardware specifications of mobile
gadgets used were CPU: HisiliconIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
158Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019Kirin 710F (Huawei), Exynos 9810
(Samsung); Core: Dual -core and Quad -
core; and RAM: 1GB –4GB.
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
Database Implementation
The mobile and web applications in this
system are supported by the PostgreSQL
database management system . A number
of JSON and PHP scripts have been used
in connecting the database with the client’s
application to allow smooth and
consistency data manipulation (including
data insertion, updating, retrieval and
deletion). The database schema contains
14 tables and their relation is displayed in
the Figure 5.
Mobile Application Implementation
The mobile application was developed
based on android platform. It contains the
simple and easy to use user -interfaces
(UIs) to provide the interaction between
user and application. This application is
only for HIV/AIDS healthcare services
clients. It is based on both English and
Swahili languages; whereby a user can
select the language of his/her preference
before logging into the system as shown in
Figure 6.
Before lo gging into the system, user must
have an activated and registered account.
During registration, the client will have to
submit personal particulars which are
useful for HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioners in delivering healthcare
services. Some of these part iculars are
gender, age, weight and height.After successful registration, the client will
berequired to use his/her unique display
name (not a real name for the sake of
maintaining anonymity) and password to
log into the system. After successfully
logging into the system, the client will be
presented with the menu containing all the
HIV/AIDS healthcare information services
provided by this platform. Figure 7 shows
the menu UI.
To maintain the client’s confidentiality and
anonymity, the mobile applicat ion
provides the client with the logout option.
This option will terminate the
communication session between his/her
profile and the system. Hence, none can be
able to use his/her account.
Web Application Implementation
The web system was developed as a cross-
platform of all web browsers (Figure 8) . It
provides the interfaces for HIV/AIDS
healthcare practitioners as well as the
system administrators working in the
CTCs. These web application interfaces
help them in offering services such as
uploading heal thcare tips and answering
the frequently asked questions.
Both the HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioners and system administrators
must be registered into the system and
have to log into the system with the unique
username and password. Figure 9 shows
the login page for HIV/AIDS practitioner
and system administrator respectively. For
each kind of user, his/her account is
associated with some specific roles.Ibrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019159
Figure 4: The Code Snippet for Android Application Implementation on the Android
StudioIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
160Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), V ol.38(No.2),Dec.2019
Figure 5: Entity Relational Schema
Figure 6: Mobile Application's Login and User Registration UIsIbrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019161
Figure 7: Mobile Application's Main Menu UI
Figure 8: Web Application's Welcome PageIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
162Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology ( Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019
Figure 9: Web Application 's Login Page
Once the HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioner has logged into the system, he
will be provided with the list of clients
whohave logged into the system seeking
for the consultation session. The
practitioner will select one client and start
the live chat consultation with him/her, as
shown in Figure 10.
Furthermore, the system administration
web page provides the system
administrators with different roles such as
managing users, health tips, providing
support and others. Figure 11 shows an
exampl e of the system administrator’s web
page when managing users.
SYSTEM TESTING AND
VALIDATION
System Testing
The system’s modules were tested to
determine if they are working as per
defined system’s requirements. Table 2
shows the test results for different tested
modules. Some of the tested modules have
been shown below:HIV/AIDS Healthcare Tips: The client
can view different HIV/AIDS healthcare
tips as they are posted by the qualified
and registered HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioners. These tips are arrange d in
the order of time they are posted, with
the newest at the top as shown by Figure
12(a). Once the tip is clicked, it provides
the client with more details on itself as
shown in Figure 12(b).
Consultation: This is the chat space for
the mobile applicati on’s client to real -
time interact to the HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioner. Figure 13 shows how the
client can interact with the HIV/AIDS
healthcare practitioner for counselling
and healthcare recommendations.
HIV/AIDS Health Centers: In order for
the system to help the client who needs a
physical healthcare from the physician,
the mobile application provides the client
with the map showing the route to the
nearest HIV/AIDS CTC. Figure 14(a)
shows the nearest CTC. With the help of
the google map services, t he shortest
route to the nearest CTC can be achieved
either by car, or by f oot as depicted in
Figure 14(b).Ibrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019163
Figure 10: Web Application's Consultation Live Chat Web Page for HIV/AIDS
Healthcare Practitioner
Figure 11: A Web Application’s Page for t he System Administrator Managing Users’
AccountIntegrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
164Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019Table 2: System's Modules Testing Results
System Requirement Test Result
The web system should be compatible with all browsers and mobile
application should work on the android OSPASS
The mobile applicat ion should enable user to switch languages from
English to SwahiliPASS
The system must allow registered user to login and logout PASS
The system must allow unregistered client to register himself/herself with a
unique usernamePASS
The system must allo w the system administrator to create, suspend or
remove a user account for the HIV/AIDS healthcare practitionersPASS
The system should allow the system administrator to upload and/or remove
HIV/AIDS health tips and other healthcare informationPASS
Thesystem should provide the live chat capability between the client and
HIV/AIDS healthcare practitioner; the healthcare practitioners to use this
module for provision of healthcare recommendationsPASS
The system should allow all successfully logged users to view the
HIV/AIDS health tips and other healthcare informationPASS
The system should produce different reports as requested by the system
administratorPASS
(a) (b)
Figure 12: Mobile Application's HIV/ AIDS Healthcare Tips UIIbrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019165
Figure 13: Mobile Application's HIV/AIDS Consultation Live Chat UI
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ):
The mobile application also provides the
answers for the frequently asked
questions. These questions are answered
by the system administrators with
consultation to the HIV/AIDS healthcare
practitioners. Figure 15(a) shows the
questions, and when the question is
clicked, it displays its answer as shown
in Figure 15(b).
Client Profile: The client is able to view
his/her profile and even update his/her
personal information as shown in Figure
16. At this UI, the client can change
his/her password to enforce his/her
account’s security. During the password
reset, the system will send the
verification code to the client’s email for
confirmation before allowing the
password reset. Figure 16 shows how the
particulars are displayed and how to
update them.
Users’ Acceptance Validation
With the system fully developed, it was
taken into the practical environment foruser’s acceptance validatio n.Fifteen (15)
people participated in this system
validation survey, among them, 10 clients
who installed the mobile application in
their mobile smart phones, 3 HIV/AIDS
healthcare practitioners and 2 system
administrators. All participants were given
3 days to use the system and after then,
they filled in the survey questionnaires.
The survey results were computed on the
mean score based on a five -point Likert
scale (5 = Strongly Agree; 4 = Agree; 3 =
Not Sure; 2 = Disagree and 1 Strongly
Disagree) as dis played in the Table 3.
From the study, the mean score for each
validated aspect was above 4 in the scale
of 5, showing that the majority of the
sampled respondents strongly agreed with
the quality and ability of the developed e -
health system. The sampled users of the
system even recommended that the
Ministry of Health (and other related
healthcare stakeholder) should employ this
developed system for delivery of
HIV/AIDS healthcare information.Integrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delive ry of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
166Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019
(a) (b)
Figure 14: Mobile Application's nearest HIV/AIDS CTC Locator UI
(a) (b)
Figure 15: Mobile Application's FAQ UIIbrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019167
Figure16: Mobile Application's Client Profile UI
Table 3: The System ’s User Acceptance Validation Response
Validation AspectNumber of Respondents
Mean ScoreStrongly
Disagree
Disagree
Note
Sure
Agree
Strongly
Agree
The system’s interfaces are attractive and
interactive001594.53
The system’s contents are easy to learn and
understand0113104.47
No compatibility problems between the
system and your mobile phone and/or
computer’s web -browser0003124.80
I need further training and/or technical
assistance for fully exploit this system842101.73
Thesystem is useful and helpful in accessing
the HIV/AIDS healthcare services003754.13
The system provides an easy and confidential
interactive between a client and HIV/AIDS
healthcare practitioner003574.27
I will use this system for accessing or
delivering HIV/AIDS healthcare information0004114.73
I am generally satisfied with this system 0014104.60
I will recommend others to use this system 0005104.67Integrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
168Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019CONCLUSION SAND
RECOMMENDATIONS
With this developed integrated e -health
platform, an easy, timely and secured
access to relevant HIV/AIDS healthcare
information can be achieved. This is due to
the fact that clients must not have to
physically and frequently visit the
HIV/AIDS CTCs for accessing the
HIV/AIDS healthcare infor mation which
can also be accessible through this
developed electronic platform. This is so
essential in enabling people to access
HIV/AIDS healthcare counselling and
recommendations without being disclosed,
identified and subjected to the stigma and
hence,saving their lives.
The developed e -health platform provides
people with the electronic profile and the
consultation history for future references.
This electronic consultation reference can
be frequently reviewed by the particular
client without frequen tly visiting the
HIV/AIDS CTCs for similar cases. It
hence provides a client with his/her
specific HIV/AIDS healthcare
recommendations as close as to his/her
mobile phone. Furthermore, the proper
usage of the developed platform can
significantly save the f inancial and time
cost to clients. The clients will normally
not have to spend the money to travel to
the HIV/AIDS CTCs and/or spend their
time in waiting queues at the CTCs
becausethey can easily interact with the
HIV/AIDS healthcare practitioners using a
secure mobile application in their phones.
Moreover, the developed platform will
provide all other HIV/AIDS stakeholders
such as the government, policy makers,
HIV/AIDS related Non -Government
Organizations (NGOs) and researcher with
the instant HIV/AIDS statistical data.
Using this computerized system, the real -
time statistical data can be achieved,
provided to the correct approved personfor proper usage, and also be useful to the
government in policy development related
to the HIV/AIDS matters.
The improvements should focus on
making this platform to be interoperable to
other existing e -health platforms.
Furthermore, the study can be expanded to
also work on the USSD platform in order
to help people who do not have
smartphones and/or have access to
internet.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank God almighty for
giving us this wonderful opportunity to
undertake this research study by providing
us with the right people and resources at
the right time. We would like to extend our
acknowledgments to the German
Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) for
funding the preparation of this manuscript
and the University of Dar es Salaam for
granting an academic leave to the
corresponding author.
REFERENCES
Argyridis A. and Argialas D.P. (2015). A
fuzzy spatial reason er for multi -scale
GEOBIA ontologies Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing,
81(6): 491-498.
DOI:10.14358/PERS.81.6.491
Bor J., Herbst A.J., Newell, M.L. and
Barnighausen T. (2013). Increases in
adult life expect ancy in rural South
Africa: Valuing the scale -up of HIV
treatment. Science, 339(6122) :961–
965.doi: 10.1126/science.1230413.
Bray T. (2017). The javascript object
notation (json) data interchange format
(No. RFC 8259)
Cole-Lewis H. and Kershaw T. (2010).
Text messaging as a tool for behaviour
change in disease prevention and
management . Epidemiol Rev, 32(1) :
56–69.doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxq004Ibrahim A. Mwammenywa, Michael H. Nkotagu andShubi F. Kaijage
Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019169Crockford D. (2006). The application/json
media type for JavaScript object
notation (json) (No. RFC 4627).
Daassnet. (2018). Available online at
http://www.daassnet.com/new/index.ph
p/en/professionalservices/d -d.html
Retrieved on 24th August 2018.
Dawson M., Burrell D.N., Rahim E. and
Brewster S. (2010). Integrating
software assurance into the software
development lifec ycle (SDLC). Journal
of Information Systems Technology
and Planning ,3(6): 49-53.
Fette I. and Melnikov A. (2011). The
WebSocket protocol (No. RFC 6455)
Feyissa G.T., Abebe L., Girma E. and
Woldie, M. (2012). Stigma and
discrimination against people living
with HIV by healthcare providers,
Southwest Ethiopia. BMC Public
Health, 12 :522.doi: 10.1186/1471 -
2458-12-522.
Hanafiah M. and Kasirun Z.M. (2007).
Using Rule -Based Technique in
Developing the Tool for Finding
Suitable Software Methodology.
Malaysian Jo urnal of Computer
Science, 20(2) :209-224.
https://doi.org/10.22452/mjcs.vol20no2.
8
Hirschberg M.A. (2015). STN 2 -1 Topic:
Rapid Application Development
(RAD): A Brief Overview. Available
online at
https://www.mendeley.com/library/vie
wer/?fileId=6f1c4f30 -d7da-50d9-67a7-
2c02747d1f83 Retrieved on 24th
August 2018
Ismail N.N.S. (2018). Implementing Rapid
Application Development (RAD)
methodology in developing Online
Laboratory and Room Booking System
(eLABAS). E Proceeding National
Innovation and Invention Competition
Through Exhibition (ICompEx’17).
Lwoga E.T., Nagu T. and Sife A.S .(2017).
Online HIV Information Seeking
Behaviour Among People Living with
HIV in Selected Tanzanian Public
Hospitals, Journ al of Systems andInformation Technology, 19 (1/2):94-
115.DOI:10.1108/JSIT -06-2016-0038
Mbonu N.C., van den Borne B. and De
Vries N.K. (2009). Stigma of People
with HIV/AIDS in Sub -Saharan Africa:
A Literature Review . Journal of
Tropical Medicine, 1 -14.doi:
10.1155/2009/145891
Mechael P., Batavia H., Kaonga N., Searle
S., Kwan A., Goldberger A. and
Ossman J. (2010). Barriers and Gaps
Affecting mHealth in Low and Middle -
Income Countries: Policy White Paper.
Mwammenywa I. A. and Kaijage S.F.
(2018a). Towards Enhancing Access of
HIV/AIDS Healthcare Information in
Tanzania: Is a Mobile Application
Platform a Way Forward? International
Journal of Information Technology and
Computer Science (IJITCS), 10 (7):31-
38.DOI:10.5815/ijitcs.2018.07.04
Mwammenywa I.A. and Kaijage S.F.
(2018b). HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information Delivery in Tanzania using
Integrated Mobile Application and
Web-based System: System’s
Functional and Non -functional
Requirements. International Journal of
Information Technology and Computer
Science (IJITCS), 10(11) :30-38.
DOI:10.5815/ijitcs.2018.11.03
Naz R. and Khan M.N.A. (2015). Rapid
applications development techniques: A
critical review. International Journal of
Software Engineering and Its
Applications ,9(11): 163 –176.
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/ijseia.2015.9
.11.15
Pimentel V. and Nickerson B.G. (2012).
Communicating and displaying real -
time data with WebSocket. IEEE
Internet Co mputing, 16(4) :45-53.
DOI:10.1109/MIC.2012.64
Porebski, B., Przystalski, K. and Nowak,
L. (2011). Building PHP Applications
with Symfony, CakePHP, and Zend
Framework. John Wiley and Sons.
Qiang C.Z., Yamamichi M., Hausman V.,
Miller R. and Altman D. (2012). Mobile
Applications for the Health Sector.Integrated Mobile and Web -based Application for Enhancing Delivery of HIV/AIDS Healthcare
Information in Tanzania
170Tanzania Journal of Engineering and Technology (Tanz. J. Engrg. Technol.), Vol .38(No.2),Dec.2019Radescu R., Davidescu A. and Pupezescu
V. (2011). New Database Manipulation
Tools in the Easy -Learning On -Line
Platform. Online Submission.
Ragunath P.K., Velmourougan S.,
Davachelvan P., Kayalvizhi S. and
Ravimohan R. (2010). Evolving a new
model (SDLC Model -2010) for
Software Development Life Cycle
(SDLC). International Journal of
Computer Science and Network
Security, 10(1) :112-119.
Reto M. (20 09). Professional android
application development. Word
Programmer to Programmer, 6(7) :
1794-1797.
Saki M., Kermanshahi S.M.K.,
Mohammadi E. and Mohraz M. (2015).
Perception of Patients With HIV/AIDS
from Stigma and Discrimination.Iranian Red Crescent Med ical Journal,
17(6): e23638.
doi:10.5812/ircmj.23638v2
Statista (2019). Global Mobile OS Market
Share in Sales to End Users from 1st
quarter 2009 to 2nd quarter 2018.
Available onlin e at
https://www.statista.com/statistics/2661
36/global -market-share-held-by-
smartphone -operating -systems/.
Retrieved on 17th July 2019
TheJoint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (2016). Global HIV
statistics. Retrieved from
www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/medi
a_asset/global -AIDS-update-
2016_en.pdf
van Genuchten R., Haring W., van Kassel
D. andYakubi K. (2012). Mobile phone
use in Tanzania. TAN2012 Mark. Res.