Leaving No One Behind: 
Perspectives and Directions from 
DFID Multi-Cadre ConferencesL eaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences            2About this report
This r eport was written by Siân Herbert (K4D) based on the discussions, presentations, preparatory 
materials, and inputs from conference participants rela ted to two DFID confer ences tha t took place in 
November 2017 and February 2018 in Bristol. Jim Woodhill (K4D) provided peer review and some text. 
Mark Harv ey (DFID ), Andrew Long (DFID), and Jo Howard (K4D) shaped the content and style of the 
report through peer review . The confer ences were designed and organised by DFID staff:  
Paula Chalinder, John Carstensen, Mark Harv ey, Andrew Long, Ann Robertson, Catherine Ferry,  
Elaine Allan, and Lindsay Law; with inputs from K4D . Thanks also to the DFID conference participants 
who con tributed written inputs including: Duncan Barker, Jo Howard, Fiona Clark, Harriet Macdonald-
Walker, Phillip Mann, Fiach O’Broin-Molloy, Beaulah Muchir a, Abdalla Shah, Nicoliene Oudwater, 
and Lisa Rudge. And to those tha t facilita ted the scenario break-out groups and acted as thematic 
experts. The live gr aphics were drawn by Juli Dosad of www.inclusioncreativa.com. T he pho tographs 
were shot and edited by Siân Herbert. The videos were shot by Siân Herbert and Sandra Baxter (IDS), 
and edited by Alice Shaw (IDS) and Alice Webb (IDS). 
Suggested citation
Herbert, S. (2019). Leaving No One Behind: Perspectives and Dir ections from DFID Multi-Cadre 
Conferences. K4D Emerging Issues Report. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.
Copyright  
This r eport was prepar ed for the UK Government’s Departmen t for International Development (DFID) 
and its partners in support of pro-poor programmes. It is licensed for non-commer cial purposes only. 
K4D cannot be held r esponsible for errors or any consequences arising fr om the use of information 
contained in this r eport. Any views and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those o f DFID, 
K4D or any other contributing organisation.
© DFID - Crown copyright 2019
Figure 1, p.11, © 2017 DFID. Repr oduced with permission.
Figure 2, p.12, © 2017 DFID. Repr oduced with permission.
Figure 3, p.12, © 2017 Development Initiatives. Repr oduced with permission.
Figure 5, p.23, © 2018 DFID. Repr oduced with permission. Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences            3Contents
Acronyms
CPRD  Country Poverty Reduction Diagnostic
CSOs  Civil society organisations
DFID  Department for International Development
FCAS  Fragile and conflict-affected states 
GDP Gross domestic product
GOM Government of Mozambique 
HD  Human development
HMG Her Majesty’s Government
ICAI Independent Commission for Aid Impact
ICED  Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development 
IDS Institute of Development Studies
K4D   Knowledge for Development programme 
LNB Leave no one behind
M&E Monitoring and evaluation 
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
ODA   Overseas development assistance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
VfM  Value for money 
WASH  Water, sanitation and hygieneForeword 4
Executive summary  5
1. Introduction 6
2. The conference approach 7
3. Understanding the LNB agenda 9
4. Critical LNB themes 16
5. LNB in practice  23
6. Taking LNB forward – key themes 26
7. Taking LNB forward – embedding in DFID work processes 32
8. Participants’ comments on the conferences 37
9. Annexes 38 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      4
Back to contentsForeword
We hear plenty of news about the remarkable reductions in poverty achieved 
in recent years and that is good news. But it is still the case that many are not 
being reached and even in those geographies that have seen such reductions, 
we know that extra effort and understanding is needed if the poverty gaps are 
not to stay forever not closed. For example, for infrastructure development 
it is essential that we understand the reasons why marginalised individuals, 
families, groups, communities, towns and regions are left behind and that we 
can do something about this. The need to understand and take appropriate 
measures was apparent before embarking on this agenda but has recently 
been compounded by an Independent Commission for Aid Impact (ICAI) 
performance review of transport and urban infrastructure that found DFID 
was not doing enough in its economic development programmes to reach the 
poorest and most vulnerable. This learning journey/multi-cadre conference 
agenda is a start to address that failing.
Mark Harvey
Head of Profession for Infrastructure
John Carstensen
Head of Profession for Climate Change 
and EnvironmentPaula Chalinder
Head of Profession for Livelihoods 
Andrew Long 
(former) Head of Profession for Social Development Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      5
Back to contents
This report is on two DFID multi-cadre conferences 
that explored how strengthening a development 
focus on leaving no one behind (LNB) improves 
the lives of people living in extreme poverty and 
marginalisation. The conferences brought together 
over 220 advisers from across the livelihoods, 
social development, infrastructure, and climate and 
environment cadres. 
The purpose of this report is to share the outcomes 
and process of the conferences with colleagues in 
DFID and partner organisations. The conferences 
provided an innovative and interdisciplinary space 
for peer learning and led to a shared understanding 
of how the LNB agenda could be progressed within 
DFID, with partners and within cadre groups.
LNB is a core commitment of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and a key priority for 
DFID, with the UK Government having been a very 
strong advocate for embedding this concept in the 
SDGs. The LNB commitment puts people at the 
centre of international development efforts, with a 
development focus on extreme poverty, exclusion, 
stigma, violence and discrimination. However, 
finding sustainable pathways out of poverty for the 
extreme poor presents development organisations 
with profound challenges.
The conferences explored the implications of LNB 
for economic development, building stability and 
increasing resilience, with attention to the cross-
cutting issues of gender, disability, digital access, 
and migration. They were innovative in the way 
they integrated collaborative facilitation processes 
and visual recording within an overall framework 
of scenario analysis. The design aimed to optimise 
peer-to-peer sharing and learning while working 
towards a collective understanding of how to 
accelerate progress on the LNB agenda. 
Central to the discussions was the concept of 
intersectionality, i.e. recognition that extreme 
poverty and marginalisation must be viewed from 
the intersection of multiple interacting social, 
political, and economic factors. In seeking solutions, 
it makes little sense to focus on one group or one 
form of exclusion without considering the wider 
context of interacting forms of exclusion.
In taking the LNB agenda forward, 
there was a focus on six themes: 
1.  Disability inclusion;
2.  Gender inequality;
3.  Infrastructure;
4.   Markets, trade, and 
supply chains;
5.  Nutrition; and
6.  Digital development. 
This report captures the key 
conclusions on these themes.
The conferences also led to ideas for how the 
LNB agenda could be strengthened within DFID 
work processes. These included the importance of 
working collaboratively across cadres, championing 
LNB through clearer narratives, creating better 
guidance on how to translate the concept into 
practice, managing in uncertain, fragile and complex 
environments, strengthening the evidence base, 
and translating the LNB agenda into implications for 
climate change.
It is worth noting that the two conferences took 
place at a time when DFID was beginning to develop 
new strands of work across the government 
department framed as ‘strategic directions’. It is only 
slowly emerging how these will be taken forward 
alongside the strategic objectives of the UK aid 
strategy of 2015.Leaving No One Behind: Perspectives and Directions 
from DFID Multi-Cadre ConferencesExecutive summary Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      6
Back to contentsLeave no one behind (LNB) is a core 
commitment of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).
LNB is a key priority for DFID as it is ‘integral to 
achieving the Global Goals [SDGs], the four strategic 
objectives of the UK aid strategy, and is in the UK’s 
national interest by creating the conditions for a 
more secure, sustainable, fairer and prosperous 
world’ (DFID, n.d.a, p.1). A strong advocate for the 
development and adoption of the LNB concept in 
the SDGs, DFID understands LNB to mean:
> Every person counts and needs to be counted;
> Every person should have a fair opportunity in life 
no matter who or where they are; and 
> The people who are furthest behind, have least 
opportunity and are the most excluded must be 
prioritised (ibid.).
The LNB commitment puts people at the centre 
of international development efforts, ‘shines a 
light on who benefits from development and 
who is excluded, and commits us all to address 
extreme poverty, exclusion, stigma, violence 
and discrimination’ (ibid.). While the Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG) target of halving global 
poverty may have been reached, the remaining 
+/- 700 million extreme poor, or 10% of the world’s 
population, will remain in extreme poverty and be 
left behind unless we sharpen a focus on how to 
design policies and programmes that explicitly and 
directly target the underlying causes of exclusion 
and marginalisation. It is clear that those left behind 
are the hardest and most costly to reach. They are 
vulnerable to poverty traps and suffer most from 
shocks related to health issues, climate change, 
natural disasters, conflict, or economic downturns. 
Finding sustainable pathways out of poverty for the 
extreme poor presents development organisations 
with profound challenges.
To explore how to meet these challenges and to 
deliver on its commitments, in 2017 and 2018 DFID 
held two professional development conferences for 
its advisers that focused on the LNB agenda. These 
cross-cadre events engaged over 220 advisers and 
sought to create a shared understanding of LNB 
challenges and generate practical ideas for how 
DFID could strengthen its response.
The two conferences were designed and facilitated 
to optimise dialogue and learning across the 
thematic cadres and employed a range of innovative 
approaches to learning and facilitation.Three core questions underpinned 
the conferences: 
1. How do we currently understand extreme 
poverty and the concept of leave no one behind? 
(focusing on experience, data and diagnostics)
2. What is our response? (understanding current 
ways of working and interventions)
3. What should we be doing differently?
Within the context of LNB and 
extreme poverty, the conferences 
focused on implications for:
> economic development;
> building stability; and 
> shocks and resilience.
Important cross-cutting issues 
include:
> gender; 
> disability; 
> digital development; and 
> migration.
This report summarises the 
discussions and conclusions from the 
two conferences.
It aims to profile the LNB and learning agendas by 
providing a written record to be shared with DFID 
staff more broadly, Her Majesty’s Government 
(HMG), and other DFID partners. By reflecting on 
the current understanding and implementation of 
the LNB agenda, in a participatory and learning-
oriented way, it also aims to inspire change to help 
policymakers better implement this important 
agenda. 
1. Introduction Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      7
Back to contentsThe core learning objective of the LNB conferences 
was to deepen understanding and build consensus 
and coherence around extreme poverty and the 
LNB agenda. The conferences provided the time and 
the space for DFID advisers to explore the evidence 
around LNB, ask questions, share experiences and 
formulate ways of improving DFID’s approach to LNB.
A range of learning and networking spaces were 
combined to create a dynamic and highly interactive 
conference process. The week-long conferences 
sought to draw on evidence and know-how, with 
presentations by internal and external experts, 
breakout sessions, ‘cadre clinics’, individual reflection 
time, round-table discussions, plenary forums, training 
sessions, networking spaces, and ‘market stalls’.
A mix of innovative, participative and collaborative 
facilitation methods were used to structure the 
conversation and optimise learning (e.g. the ‘ritual 
dissent’ exercise).1 To help capture the content of the 
conferences, a graphic artist worked with participants 
to represent key messages and conclusions. Videos 
were also produced to share conference outcomes. 
The diversity of spaces, exercises, methods, and ways 
of capturing the discussions were designed to meet 
the different learning styles of participants. 
Central to the design of the conferences was 
professional development training on scenario 
analysis. Delivered by the DFID-funded Infrastructure 
and Cities for Economic Development (ICED) facility,2 Box 1: Organisational learning
The two LNB conferences were part of 
DFID’s wider focus on and investment in 
organisational learning. As recognised by 
the 2014 ICAI review on how DFID meets 
its objectives, there is a need for DFID to 
constantly improve its organisational 
learning. In this context the two 
conferences were considered ‘learning 
journeys’, Table A1 on page 38 summarises 
the success factors for good organisational 
learning from DFID’s Organisational 
Learning Benchmarking Framework.
1  http:/ /cognitive-edge.com/methods/ritual-dissent/  
2  http:/ /icedfacility.org/about/
2. The conference approach
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      8
Back to contents
the scenario training introduced participants to 
methods for analysis and planning in complex 
situations and helped to drive a more critical 
analysis of the underlying causes of extreme 
poverty. Scenario training enabled participants to 
explore how different stakeholders might behave in 
new and uncertain situations. This led to discussions 
on the implications for DFID’s processes of planning 
and programming.
The conferences focused on learning across internal 
networks and included 2203 advisers from the 
social development, livelihoods, environment and 
climate, and infrastructure cadres. This presented 
a valuable opportunity for staff to discuss issues with colleagues from different cadres, and for 
colleagues based in different country offices to 
talk face to face with the UK-based policy teams 
and researchers. DFID chose this multi-cadre 
approach in recognition that current development 
efforts are often hampered by siloed thinking and 
working practices, and that development challenges 
require collaborative working across thematic areas. 
Bringing together the four cadres fostered deeper 
understanding and relations, and strengthened 
networks and working across cadres. 
The second conference built on the first conference: 
much was learned from the first event that led to 
some design changes. The second conference 
also sought to build on and not just repeat the 
first conference. This report covers the combined 
outcomes and conclusions.
The conferences were supported by DFID’s 
Knowledge for Development (K4D) programme.4  
K4D helped to organise technical input and 
sessions, provided guidance on learning processes, 
supported facilitation, and coordinated the graphic 
recording and documentation of the conferences.
Box 2: Scenario training
The objective of the scenario training was 
to support DFID advisers to think more 
strategically and in the longer term, and 
in contexts of uncertainty. The actor-
based methodology drew on concepts 
from game theory, with the underlying 
assumptions that scenario planning tries 
to determine how defined actors with clear 
and identifiable priorities, can be expected 
to interact with one another in a defined 
context. The participants applied this to real-
life DFID case studies that led to an analysis 
of the range of possible ‘future landscapes’, 
including baseline, best and worst-case 
scenarios, and to an understanding of what 
drives change (positive and negative).
3  80 advisers attended the November 2017 conference, and 140 attended the February 2018 conference. 
4  https:/ /www.ids.ac.uk/k4d Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      9
Back to contentsWhat does LNB mean? 
Box 3: Live drawing (graphic recording) 
The live drawing (graphic recording) helped participants to visualise the issues and the 
connections, and to remember what had been discussed. Conference participants engaged 
directly with the graphic artist, suggesting things to include and how to visualise them, creating a 
fun and participatory environment. It also promoted teamwork, as some individuals took the lead 
in designing graphic summaries for their groups. The photos and videos provided visual and audio 
outputs for the participants to internalise and remember the conference by, and they facilitated 
the wider dissemination of the messages to people beyond the conference.3. Understanding the LNB agenda
The SDGs have sought to overcome some 
limitations of the approach to the MDGs. Because 
the MDGs focused attention on development at 
the aggregate country level, not enough attention 
was given to those left in poverty traps due to 
marginalisation and exclusion. The LNB concept 
is broad enough to have been adopted by 193 
countries in 2015 as part of the SDG agenda, 
yet this breadth also means the concept can be 
interpreted in many different ways. To tackle the 
challenges of those left behind, it is necessary to 
be clear about who is left behind and why they are 
left behind – the geographically remote, the hard 
to reach, the deliberately hidden, the excluded, the vulnerable, the invisible. Unpacking the dimensions 
and complexities of LNB became a core theme of 
the conferences. This led to discussion about the 
implications for advisers. How do advisers make 
decisions of who to focus on? How do advisers 
understand and evaluate the trade-offs? For 
example, trade-offs in relation to LNB and other 
policy and strategic priorities – such as value for 
money, when it may be very expensive to reach 
the poorest. Or in terms of interventions that are 
targeted on specific groups vs those that aim for 
systematic change (see Figure 4 for a summary of 
DFID advisers’ questions about LNB).
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      10
Back to contents
Watch this video clip to see Kim Bradford Smith 
summarise what intersectionality means, and 
why it matters for the LNB agenda
https:/ /youtu.be/ukR28rT-6Qc
5 Oxford English Dictionary definition of intersectionality: https:/ /en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/intersectionality Intersectionality 
The concept of intersectionality was presented 
as central to LNB, as it explains how the 
interconnected nature of social categorisations 
(e.g. gender, ethnic identity, class) intersect to 
‘create overlapping and interdependent systems 
of discrimination or disadvantage.’5 While the 
concept of intersectionality can be complicated to 
communicate, it has been useful in project design 
and evaluation as an analytical tool to understand 
the different situations and needs of project 
beneficiaries. It is important not to oversimplify, 
but instead to unpack the concept and think about 
what works for different categories of people who 
are extremely poor (e.g. those without land, the 
unemployed). 
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      11
Back to contentsBig picture trends
DFID’s Deputy Chief Economist, Nick Lea, presented 
a global context on poverty. Due to the Asian Miracle 
there has been a striking reduction in extreme 
poverty. By 2030, the total global poverty headcount 
is projected to drop to 5% of the population. 
However, as Figure 1 shows, there are significant 
regional differences. In terms of gross domestic 
product (GDP) per capita, relative to the OECD, East 
Asia is converging, South Asia is on an upward trend 
but from a low base, and Latin America is falling 
after being on an upward trend. Strikingly, by 2030 
Africa will still have 29% of its population living in extreme poverty, accounting for virtually all of the 
global 5%, and critically, 80% of the extreme poor 
will be living in fragile states. However, extreme 
poverty only tells part of the story, as within 
countries inequality is growing. 
The huge question is how to tackle extreme 
poverty and the trade-offs between increases to 
overall economic growth vs strategies that focus 
more exclusively on targeting extremely poor or 
marginalised groups. The challenge is to find win-
win strategies in this regard.
Figure 1: The future of extreme poverty – people living under $1.90 (millions)
Source: Lea (2017)6
A challenging perspective on the equity  
of development was contributed by the 
‘P20 Initiative’, which draws attention to the 
poorest 20% of the world’s population –  
the estimated 1.4 billion people who live 
below the international poverty line and 
face multiple and intersecting deprivations 
(Development Initiatives, 2017). 
6   From Tackling extreme poverty and leaving noone behind, PowerPoint Presentation, by N. Lea, 2017, unpublished, based on data from PovCalNet 
and projections from CEOFF poverty model. © 2017 DFID. Reproduced with permission. Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      12
Back to contentsFigure 2: DFID Fragile States List 2017
Figure 3: Past and projected income gap between the P20 and everyone else
Source: Development Initiatives (2017, p.9)8While the proportion of people in extreme poverty is 
falling (nearly) everywhere, it is increasing in fragile 
states, especially in Africa (see Figure 2). 
Countries in transition still face considerable poverty 
levels and risks of reversal; however in the future, conflict and fragility will become the main reasons 
for the persistence of extreme poverty (ibid.). 
Significantly, the gap between the poorest 20%  
of people and everyone else is getting bigger (see 
Figure 3) (ibid.).
Source: Lea (2017)7
High fragility
Medium fragility
Low fragility
Neighbour
7  From Tackling extreme poverty and leaving no one behind, PowerPoint Presentation, by N. Lea, 2017, unpublished.  
© 2017 DFID. Reproduced with permission.
8  From The P20 initiative: Data to leave no one behind, Baseline Report, by Development Initiatives, 2017:  
http:/ /devinit.org/post/p20-initia tive-data-to-leave-no-one-behind  © 2017 Development Initiatives. Reproduced with permission.$2.33$1.75$24.90$31.48
$0$5$10$15$20$25$30$35
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035Daily per capita income
P20 Rest of the populationIncome gap
$23Income gap
$29 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      13
Back to contentsData 
Access to, use of, and the quality of data in 
uncertain and unpredictable contexts is central 
to understanding development trends, and who 
is being left behind. Previously, the emphasis 
has been on collecting data for donors’ own 
accountability systems, but not on sharing data 
with other development partners. This has meant 
that a lot of investment in data collection is wasted, 
and the data landscape is fragmented. The SDGs 
provide an impetus for the international system to 
join up to support data collection at the national 
level, and data sharing. This data can then be used 
to inform a government’s national priorities, and 
donors can align around these national priorities. 
Other sources of data should also be utilised, for 
example data from the private sector, from civil 
society organisations (CSOs), and new technologies 
such as satellite imagery.
Biased data is much more damaging than poor 
data, and DFID and other donors should be brave 
enough to decline the use of biased data. It is 
important that advisers examine the transparency 
of how data is produced and the institution 
producing it. National organisations that oversee 
data production – looking at the methodologies and 
Watch this video clip to see Neil Jackson 
summarise why data matters for the 
LNB agenda 
https:/ /youtu.be/dxNXOyfaWUg
sources of data – are important. There is also the 
risk of unconscious and conscious bias in DFID’s 
management and collection of data related to 
projects. The international community needs 
to be clear when it provides data on where the 
information came from and how it was gathered. 
Does DFID need an organisation-wide model 
or methodology to assess progress on LNB, 
including analysis at the portfolio level? Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
 14
Back to contentsWork on where inequalities intersect - on a life cycle approach
Invest in early childhood development 
Working on positive social norms is a long-term strategy  
Building voice, agency and power of those left behind 
Facilitating Southern-based organisations to participate in DFID procurement 
New business models - incentivise private sector sustainable business models 
Increase access to markets for the bottom of the pyramid 
Use indigenous people’s rights checklist 
Longer action windows for funding and programming 
Plan in time for consultation 
Future proofing against future emerging minority groups Suggestions  
for LNB Figure 4: Mind map of the conference participants’ questions about LNB from conference 2, day 1 (summarised from Post-It notes)
What are the implications 
of environment and climate 
change for LNB?Climate change affects the poorest/worst off  
and is leaving people behind
Sustainability of LNB 
Future generations 
Climate change trends 
How do we 
tackle the 
practical  
on-the-ground 
challenges of 
LNB? How do we engage with domestic  
political economy of LNB?Can economic development and 
LNB actually be integrated? 
How do we work with powerful 
groups who benefit from inequality?
Fragile states 
Conflict and peace Country context
Actors 
The LNB agenda needs to be strategic 
Recognise the complexity 
Ensure we present contextually relevant  
solutions and our thinking is not too Western 
Avoid a one-size-fits-all approach How do we reach the poorest when country 
systems cannot reach the majority of the poor? 
Approach Does HMG still favour social protection?
Does HMG still favour LNB? 
Inclusive economic development 
Can DFID really prioritise the most 
marginalised first (that is radical)?
VfM vs LNB 
Is HMG prepared to pay for it?
Trade-offs
Prioritising 
Cost per beneficiary 
Reallocating Can DFID 
really deliver 
on LNB? 
Risk
Scale of impact VfM 
Expertise to target 
Analysis
Planning Can DFID make the programming 
choices that will truly reach 
extreme poor? CostWhat are the tensions between 
UK national interest and LNB? 
LNB beyond the tick box? Is there continued UK political 
will to be a global leader on LNB 
in the context of the SDGs?
Are there the necessary incentives? Who do you  
mean by LNB? How do we understand the multidimensional nature of poverty? 
Poorest in poor countries, poorest in MICS, poorest in fragile states? 
Gender
Disability 
lntersectionaIity 
Geography - remote areas 
The invisible, the voiceless 
Intersecting inequalities, i.e. social identities plus environment, geography, poverty, etc.
Reaching the ‘highest’ not just the ‘low-hanging fruit’ 
Mental health 
Marginalised vs most marginalised 
How do we work with the private sector? Our questions 
about LNB
Source: Author’s own Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      15
Back to contentsWatch this video clip to see David Hallam 
explain the opportunities and enablers that 
DFID has to address extreme poverty
https:/ /youtu.be/XBXULFPLePUThe UK’s LNB narrative 
DFID’s LNB framework has three pillars:
Include for opportunity  
Support inclusive growth, 
institutions, and services. 
Include people who are furthest 
behind in development 
and growth processes, as 
well as delivering targeted 
programmes and services to 
reach populations that are 
particularly hard to reach.
Understand for action  
Strengthen understanding 
and analysis of who, where, 
and why people are being left 
behind. Improve data capacity 
and use of disaggregated 
data to inform decisions, and 
continue to build evidence 
of what works in different 
contexts (as a minimum 
expectation for all overseas 
development assistance  
(ODA) spend).Empower for change  
Empower those people who 
are furthest behind to be 
agents of change. Enable their 
voices to be heard and acted 
upon and work with others 
to challenge discrimination 
and harmful social norms, 
and promote opportunities 
to hold governments and 
implementers to account. 
Source: Author’s own, with text from DFID (n.d.a, p.3) Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
 16
Back to contents
4. Critical LNB themes Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      17
Back to contentsEconomic development
When working on economic development, complex 
trade-offs include: What is the balance between 
transformational approaches and poverty alleviation 
in portfolios? At what point does inequality become 
excessive for building an inclusive society and 
for building a middle class that drives a dynamic 
domestic economy? Which should we target? 
Should cost-effectiveness be a consideration in 
poverty alleviation that leaves no one behind? 
A key gap was identified: while environmental 
degradation (e.g. clean air, clean water, clean land) 
and climate change are key drivers of poverty and 
marginalisation, and thus central to eradicating 
extreme poverty and to LNB, development actors 
tend not to address them. They are too often the 
‘elephant in the room’. 
DFID’s economic development strategy (DFID, 
2017b) in relation to LNB, includes work on:
> Tackling gender discrimination and barriers for 
women; 
> Creating more opportunities for women, the poorest, 
and excluded groups to access improved jobs, 
labour rights, and working conditions in high-growth 
sectors; 
> Continuing work on improving the conditions in the 
sectors where most of the poor currently work – such 
as informal micro-enterprises or smallholder and 
subsistence agriculture; and 
> Working across HMG to end modern slavery and child 
exploitation.In responding to the ICAI learning review on 
inclusive growth in Africa, DFID is (a) enhancing its 
diagnostic tools (the Country Poverty Reduction 
Diagnostic (CPRD) and the Inclusive Growth 
Diagnostic); (b) developing inclusion diagnostics and 
distributional analysis tools; and (c) interrogating 
its monitoring, evaluation and results story in more 
detail, particularly the ability to establish baselines 
and track progress, and understanding distributional 
impacts (ICAI, 2017). 
Watch this video clip to see Tony Burdon discuss 
DFID’s opportunities and challenges in tackling 
extreme poverty in the private sector by 2030 
and beyond
https:/ /youtu.be/ZMr69DvbU2k
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
 18
Back to contents
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      19
Back to contentsWatch this video clip to see Patrick Pollard 
explain why building stability matters for 
the LNB agenda 
https:/ /youtu.be/Abbyo0dE69wBuilding stability
Most of the world’s extreme poor live in fragile 
and conflict-affected states (FCAS), and poverty 
projections predict that FCAS will have an even 
greater share of the world’s extreme poor in the 
future. Human development lags behind in FCAS, 
which tend to be less stable and have particularly 
negative gendered outcomes. Thus, conflict and 
fragility is central to the LNB agenda, and this is 
reflected in the UK Government’s commitment 
to spend 50% of its aid in FCAS. While DFID’s 
interventions in FCAS have been typically 
humanitarian focused, economic development and 
development responses are increasingly part of 
the response (DFID, 2016). 
The complexities of LNB in FCAS include: how to 
manage trade-offs and unintended consequences 
in balancing LNB and stability; tools/analysis to 
draw on (e.g. to understand vulnerability in crises); 
and the different gendered effects and needs in 
different fragile and conflict-affected contexts. 
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      20
Back to contentsGender equality
DFID has updated its high-level gender equality 
strategy (DFID, 2018a), and calls for the 
international community to step up and deliver 
its promises on gender equality. It adds women’s 
political empowerment to the DFID focus areas 
for action; the other focus areas are women’s 
economic empowerment, girls’ education, sexual 
and reproductive health and rights, and ending 
violence against women and girls. The LNB lens 
means disaggregating women and girls to focus 
more on marginalised women and girls, and on 
gender mainstreaming in country offices (e.g. 
through gender audits and gender reviews).
Shocks and resilience 
Building resilience to regional health shocks 
includes paying attention to infectious diseases 
and the growing threat of antimicrobial resistance. 
Inclusion is the key to preventing and mitigating 
the effects of health shocks, as outbreaks and 
health emergencies often occur in the most 
vulnerable, marginalised populations. Better data 
and understanding of excluded populations, and 
the barriers to their inclusion, are needed for DFID 
to target its interventions.The digital revolution
The digital revolution – especially the rapid 
expansion of mobile phone use and internet 
access – presents an unprecedented opportunity 
to accelerate progress towards the SDGs. However, 
progress is uneven and is not spreading rapidly 
enough, so digital exclusion risks leaving many 
behind. DFID’s digital strategy (DFID, 2018b) sets 
out a series of issues for further investigation:
> How is digital technology being used in the sectors 
and contexts in which DFID works? 
> Who is likely to be left behind in a digital world  
and why?
> What types of interventions might help tackle 
barriers to access and use of digital technology?
> What risks might people face when online? 
> How does this differ for different protected 
characteristics? 
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      21
Back to contents
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      22
Back to contentsDisability 
The presentation of DFID’s disability framework 
highlighted that the framework needs updating 
to be more ambitious (DFID, 2015). This reflects 
DFID’s prioritisation of this issue, and the huge 
scale of need across the world, and particularly 
in FCAS (e.g. for every child killed in conflict, a 
further three are disabled). 
At the Global Disability Summit held in 2018, there 
were four focus areas:
> Inclusive education;
> Routes to economic empowerment, including 
social protection;
> Assistive devices and technology; and
> Addressing stigma and discrimination, including 
violence.
To make progress on these areas, DFID has identified  
three key enablers: political will; data and evidence; 
and leadership and representation. 
An interesting discussion ensued, with inclusive 
infrastructure a key theme. In designing services, 
DFID advisers can start with questions such as: 
What prevents disabled women from accessing a 
service? Data disaggregation and evidence are key 
to informing this. 
Migration and modern slavery 
An estimated 244 million people worldwide are on 
the move (3% of the world’s population), and in 
2017 alone, 170,000 people arrived in Europe across 
the Mediterranean. Migration is an important area 
for future UK and EU cooperation, and requires 
a transnational approach, yet the international 
response is fragmented. Tackling modern slavery9 
is part of the UK Government’s approach to 
irregular migration, and is a foreign policy priority. 
Vulnerability to modern slavery is not an inherent 
characteristic but is socially constructed, relational, 
and interacts with drivers such as poverty and 
environmental degradation. Interventions thus need 
to be multidisciplinary (e.g. across education, health, 
social protection and livelihoods) and planned 
across HMG. LNB considerations need to be built 
into migration and modern slavery approaches from 
the beginning.
9  See photography of modern day slavery at https:/ /www.lisakristine.com/shop-image-collection/modern-day-slavery/ Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      23
Back to contents5. LNB in practice 
Trailblazers
DFID has set up four ‘trailblazer’ case study country offices to pilot and mainstream its LNB approach 
– DFID Zimbabwe, DFID Rwanda, DFID Nepal, and DFID Bangladesh. Their learning has so far highlighted the 
following lessons:
Resource 
scarcity and 
trade-offsValue-for-
money 
question
A country’s 
political 
economyLBN 
leadership 
and appetite
Partners’ 
capacity and 
buy-inDFID’s 
capacity and 
buy-in
Source: Adapted from Kirsch (2018)10Include for opportunity
>  Consider LNB-sensitive procurement strategies;
> Mainstream LNB thinking in DFID teams to create a better office culture;
> Ensure that LNB groups are targeted in programmes; and
> Encourage leadership of LNB groups in programmes.
Understand for action
>  Collect and share disaggregated quantitative and qualitative data
> Use LNB data to better target LNB groups in programmes and policies; and
> Develop tools and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems to monitor 
progress on LNB priorities.
Empower for change
> Collect and consider feedback from LNB groups to inform programmes and policies;
> Build local capacity to hold government accountable on LNB issues; and
> Consider LNB issues and voices in DFID’s reporting.
Figure 5: Key strategic challenges
10   From Leave no one behind (LNB) mainstreaming in practice: DFID’s LNB trailblazer countries, Powerpoint Presentation  
by M. Kirsch, 2018, unpublished. © 2018 DFID. Adapted with permission. Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      24
Back to contentsTransforming responses to VfM
The LNB agenda now means that equity is a key 
factor to consider when assessing value for money 
(VfM) – in terms of the equity of outcomes, outputs, 
and inputs. This has shifted the conversation from 
‘what is the VfM for DFID?’ to ‘what is the VfM for 
the beneficiaries?’. This means targeting spending 
on disadvantaged people has a bigger value than 
spending on more privileged people, as it is about the 
value the intervention brings to the recipient, not just 
the brute cost. All DFID business cases now need to 
set out how they will measure equity, increasing the 
incentives to include equity experts and to include 
marginalised groups in the business case. 
Safeguarding 
Safeguarding people and the environment is 
an increasingly important issue as the global 
development community focuses on industry 
standards and integrity. It is particularly important 
from a LNB perspective as it is often the extremely 
poor and marginalised who are most vulnerable 
to exploitation. DFID is giving significant attention 
to safeguarding across its programmes and policy 
influencing work. A recent ICAI report on transport 
and urban infrastructure gives an example: 
  In the infrastructure sector, ‘safeguarding’ refers  
to the protection of communities and the 
environment from inadvertent harm, for example 
through acquisition of land, road accidents, unsafe work practices or the disruption of 
ecologically sensitive habitats. This also 
includes protecting vulnerable people from 
sexual abuse and exploitation, which is a risk in 
infrastructure projects given the concentration 
of unaccompanied men at work sites  
(ICAI, 2018, p.iii).
The same report highlights that: 
  DFID relies on its multilateral partners 
to implement appropriate social and 
environmental safeguards, including protecting 
beneficiaries from harm. While the department 
has worked actively at the global level to 
strengthen multilaterals’ safeguarding policies, 
it is not active enough in ensuring there is 
adequate implementation capacity in-country 
(ibid. p.3). 
Challenges identified at the conference include: 
safeguarding in difficult-to-reach places; resource 
limitations; what is meant by safeguarding and 
how it differs (e.g. by organisation or according 
to national culture); problems with the conflation 
of political risk and operational risk; the need for 
support and training to carry it out; safeguarding 
policies turning into tick-box exercises; and 
the tendency to thinking of safeguarding as 
siloed issues (e.g. the current focus on sexual 
exploitation), rather than holistically.
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      25
Back to contentsGraduation approaches11
Insights from five large graduation programmes 
in Bangladesh have led to a revision of the 
DFID-Bangladesh graduation model. While the 
former graduation approach utilised in the DFID 
programmes has been ‘transformational’, it has been 
limited by (a) the narrow focus on extremely poor 
households, which has not been enough to tackle 
social barriers; (b) ‘graduation’ taking place without 
education and good nutrition, suggesting a greater 
role for basic services; and (c) the challenge of how 
to adapt delivery to tackle poverty churn. 
Questions remain such as (a) how to facilitate 
sustained pathways out of poverty for all – for 
example, for labour-poor households; (b) how to go 
beyond the focus on livelihoods in situ to facilitating 
migration and mobility; and (c) how to connect to 
national social protection systems as part of an exit 
strategy. 
The new graduation model can provide a bridge 
between social protection and inclusive growth 
(bottom-up transformational growth), and is an 
important intervention in the LNB toolbox. 
11  The session also screened this short video: CGAP-Ford Foundation (2014) Graduation approach: creating pathways out of extreme poverty. Video. 
Retrieved from https:/ /youtu.be/XWQn2W9ZDvEKeeping the poorest safe in 
protracted crises
Development and humanitarian actors need to 
deliver differently in protracted crises to ensure 
the poorest and most vulnerable are not left 
behind. DFID must shift how it operates by: 
> Investing through development channels 
whenever possible, and humanitarian ones only 
when humanitarian principles cannot otherwise 
be met; 
> Investing early to preserve and build essential 
services, shock-responsive social protection 
systems, and the private sector; and 
> Addressing the economic, social, and political 
exclusion of marginalised groups (including 
women and girls, refugees and internally 
displaced people). 
DFID must also shift how it collaborates and 
designs programmes by: 
> Establishing multidisciplinary teams from the 
outset – humanitarian, development, and 
peacebuilding;
> Engaging with international partners and 
harnessing funding; 
> Planning early and preparing for future risks; 
> Building in contingencies and using flexible and 
shock-responsive programming; and 
> Using adaptive programming.
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      26
Back to contents6. Taking LNB forward – key themes
The first conference explored six key LNB themes 
through cross-cadre groups using the scenario 
analysis process. Their conclusions are summarised 
in this section in text, video and graphics.
Disability inclusion
An estimated 800 million people in sub-Saharan 
Africa live with disability, although the data is  
very limited. Disability is at the heart of DFID’s  
LNB agenda. 
To step up and deliver on disability, three key  
ideas for DFID were outlined:
Watch this video clip to see why disability 
inclusion matters for the LNB agenda
https:/ /youtu.be/fD6FAa_izNg
 > ‘Nothing about us 
without us’ – any 
programme or policy 
DFID develops must 
include disabled 
people in the design 
process. 
> Use carrots and sticks 
to incentivise DFID’s 
programme partners 
to do more on this 
agenda – to get better 
data on disability, to 
have more inclusive 
teams, and to 
ensure the agenda 
is mainstreamed 
throughout its work. 
> In anticipation of 
the 2018 Disability 
Summit, to get 
everyone at DFID 
to make a personal 
and public pledge to 
systematically and 
consistently include 
disabled people in 
DFID’s work (using 
the hashtag #IDPWD 
– International Day of 
People with Disability).  Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      27
Back to contents
Gender inequality
There is a huge body of evidence on the 
importance of gender equality for other 
development outcomes – for example, if women 
and men played an equal role in the economy 
we could see a 26% increase in GDP; and we 
know that when women are at the table at peace 
negotiations, the agreements are more likely to be 
sustainable and effective. We will not be able to 
make progress on the LNB agenda without putting 
women and girls at the centre of those efforts. 
For DFID to move beyond its current patchy –  
sometimes tick box – approach to take a 
transformational approach to gender equality,  
it needs to make long-term investments across 
multiple sectors. For example, interventions in 
education and health also need to address 
infrastructural needs and the needs of women  
in the economy. Watch this video clip to see why gender 
inequality matters for the LNB agenda
https:/ /youtu.be/IBrgVlIbMxw
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      28
Back to contents
Infrastructure
Eighty per cent of the global challenge to ensure 
access to energy for all is located in just 20 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa – for example in 
Malawi, 90% of the population cook with wood, 
which increases the risk of deforestation. Energy is 
a crucial element and vehicle for achieving many 
of the SDGs, particularly those linking to economic 
growth, climate, health, and other sectors. 
In aiming to reach the most vulnerable, DFID needs 
a holistic and integrated approach that combines 
a mix of on-grid and off-grid projects across its 
portfolios. Important areas to address are: including 
the most vulnerable in discussions about where the 
grid is extended to; ensuring high standards and 
safeguarding in energy projects; and addressing the 
huge data gap. Their conclusion was: ‘Ditch the silos, 
work together, bridge the knowledge gap’.Watch this video clip to see why infrastructure 
matters for the LNB agenda
https:/ /youtu.be/SBdsTFYN988
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      29
Back to contents
Markets, trade, and supply chains 
In protracted humanitarian crises, development and 
humanitarian responses often focus on essential 
short-term needs (through in-kind transfers), yet 
they do not link up to longer-term needs – for 
example, those that might focus on markets, trade, 
and supply chains. 
To meet this challenge, DFID should focus on 
planning and coherence at the portfolio level, and 
at the country business-plan level, to develop an 
approach that combines in-kind transfers with 
work to develop markets, addressing both short- 
and long-term needs. This means that not every 
programme and business case would have a direct 
impact on the extreme poor within the programme 
time frame, but the impact would be understood 
as part of a bigger picture with the ultimate aim of 
transformational change.Watch this video clip to see why markets, trade, 
and supply chains matter for the LNB agenda 
https:/ /youtu.be/tlTAqKrgBuI
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      30
Back to contents
Nutrition
One in three of the world’s population suffers from 
some form of malnutrition. The impact is lifelong 
and intergenerational – children who are stunted are 
less able to learn and are less productive as adults. 
Better nutrition underpins many of the SDGs but 
equally, to achieve nutritional outcomes we need 
progress on almost all of the SDGs. Three focus 
areas for DFID were identified:
> Malnutrition in fragile and conflict-affected areas 
– especially those countries where malnutrition is 
projected to get worse;
> Externally – maintaining DFID’s global leadership 
role on nutrition; and 
> Internally – with sustained leadership and nutrition 
champions making sure that nutrition is at the 
heart of DFID’s efforts to reach the SDGs.Watch this video clip to see why nutrition 
matters for the LNB agenda
 https:/ /youtu.be/OxAa5dMAxbI
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      31
Back to contents
Digital development
Seven out of 10 people worldwide own a mobile 
phone, and many already have internet access. 
Digital technology presents one of the greatest 
opportunities of our time to accelerate progress 
towards the SDGs. Yet pre-existing marginalisation 
intersects with digital inclusion, and thus the digital 
divide is increasing in many areas of the world – for 
example, women in sub-Saharan Africa are 25% less 
likely than their male counterparts to access the 
internet.
To make progress on this agenda, it was suggested 
that DFID engages through multi-stakeholder 
relationships (with the private sector, civil society, 
national governments and donors) to articulate 
the LNB agenda. It can also play a role in the data 
revolution to understand who is digitally excluded 
and why. Watch this video clip to see why digital 
development matters for the  
LNB agenda
https:/ /youtu.be/bOHQfJGH48E
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      32
Back to contents7. Taking LNB forward – embedding 
in DFID work processes
Building on the first conference, the second 
conference concluded by looking at how the LNB 
agenda could be strengthened in DFID’s operations 
and work processes. The conclusions were shared 
with a representative of DFID’s Executive Committee 
Office (ExCO) on the last day of the conference.
The two conferences took place at a time when DFID 
was developing a set of new ‘strategic directions’ 
that will complement the strategic objectives of the 
UK aid strategy of 2015. There is an opportunity to 
explore the implications of the LNB agenda for each 
of the new strategic directions.
Championing the LNB agenda 
through a LNB narrative that  
works for all 
Issue
LNB has multiple drivers and impacts, so an 
interdisciplinary approach based on collaborative 
working and understanding across cadres and 
across the UK Government is essential. Better 
collaboration can help overcome siloed working and 
thinking: to do no harm, to manage risk, to maximise 
impact, and to leverage value and influence.The importance of working collaboratively is well 
recognised in DFID, and has been stressed by 
the ICAI. However, day-to-day pressures and 
existing organisation structures remain a barrier. 
Management leadership, along with allocating the 
necessary time, space, and resources, is necessary 
to strengthen the depth of collaborative work 
needed for LNB. 
Ideas for action
> Develop an incentives framework for staff to have 
the time and space for greater collaborative working. 
Unpack further the role of incentives to understand 
better how to operationalise, and how to prioritise 
collaborative learning and working.
> Focus on issues that present easy ways to 
collaborate, and where people can get traction. 
Analyse cases where cadres already collaborate 
well on a LNB agenda to understand what is 
happening and what can be built on – for example 
joint analyses, joint learning, joint events, and joint 
diagnostics,12 perhaps at the country level, or through 
joint units.
> Communicate these new ways of working – the tools, 
resources, and language – to build legitimacy for this 
agenda and to influence senior management.
> Mainstream cross-cadre and cross-HMG working in 
everyday programme management.
12  These conferences pre-dated the DFID Commission on Country Development Diagnostics, and there has now been progress on this recommendation to 
strengthen interdisciplinary working on analysis and diagnostics.
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      33
Back to contentsChampioning the LNB agenda through 
a LNB narrative that works for all 
Issue
While the LNB agenda has strong DFID backing, 
the concept is not always well understood and 
there is a need to better embed LNB thinking and 
practice in the work of programming, policy, and 
research teams. This requires strong champions at 
country and headquarters level. In turn, a clearer 
narrative about LNB is necessary to enable the 
practical benefits and implications to be more 
easily communicated. There is a need to encourage 
context-specific understanding of exclusion and the 
deeper causes of why people are left behind.
Ideas for action
> Unpack the LNB strapline – create specific LNB 
narratives for each cadre so they can engage and 
contextualise LNB in their work, and have clarity in 
their communication. 
> Move the debate on LNB into the core of the work 
of all cadres, rather than it being seen as largely a 
social development issue.
> Use evidence thoughtfully to show the 
complexities of the challenges and a fuller picture, 
not just a particular agenda/view. Use good 
quality data to elucidate those benefiting, the 
gaps, and the counterfactuals.
> Design in an equity approach to programming 
right at the start – for example, inclusive 
education and infrastructure.> Be wary of trade-offs becoming an excuse not to 
engage with LNB. 
> Review who should ‘own’ the LNB agenda 
and embed it across DFID through leadership, 
capability building, and systems.
> Ensure LNB is explicitly linked to ‘equity’ in the VfM 
analysis.
From rhetoric to reality, translating 
LNB into practical reality through 
clear guidance 
Issue
To make the LNB concept operational, and to make 
real progress on this agenda, clear guidance is 
needed as to what to prioritise, with an elaboration 
of the costs, choices, and trade-offs involved. This 
needs to avoid reductionist approaches to LNB 
which focus on particular excluded groups without 
a context-specific understanding – for example, 
disability inclusive programming is not just about 
including people with disabilities. 
Ideas for action
> Have a clear discussion about, and position on, 
the choices that LNB presents in a given situation, 
and the expected results (e.g. the number of 
beneficiaries, the extent of marginalisation 
targeted, or the ease of access required). Work 
out how to incentivise reaching those left furthest 
behind.
> Better integrate and consolidate LNB in critical 
organisation-wide strategies (e.g. on economic 
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      34
Back to contents development, conflict/stability, the Africa strategy, 
etc.), and potentially in portfolio-wide approaches 
to support better consideration and cohesion of 
LNB choices.
> Better integrate and consolidate LNB in critical 
organisation-wide strategies (e.g. on economic 
development, conflict/stability, the Africa strategy, 
etc.), and potentially in portfolio-wide approaches 
to support better consideration and cohesion of 
LNB choices.
> Focus and coordinate research efforts on defining 
opportunity costs. Improve internal and external 
analysis, communication and guidance around  
trade-offs.
> At the programme level, consider capturing the 
tensions in reaching the most marginalised, and 
the choices that may need to be made.
Dynamism, uncertainty, 
and future proofing
Issue
How can we plan and programme effectively for LNB 
given uncertainty, change, and fragility? How can we understand and evaluate short- and long-term 
trade-offs, so we can respond flexibly to shocks? 
Ideas for action
> Develop digital tools for modelling, analysis, and 
scenario planning.
> Increase the flexibility in spending targets, for 
example spreading resource allocation over a 
longer time frame to better manage shocks.
> Carry out LNB scenario planning at multiple levels 
– for example programme, country office, regional 
and global – and integrate explicit LNB scenarios, 
issues, and trade-offs into planning. 
> Develop systems to continually monitor, review, 
and adjust country/spending departments that 
are specific to LNB action plans/strategies through 
a VfM lens.
> Develop cross-sector strategies and programming 
with a focus on making LNB more effective than 
individual approaches – for example with better 
VfM, there is more scope for managing uncertainty 
and dynamism. 
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      35
Back to contents
Strengthen the evidence, data, and 
evaluation on LNB 
Issue
DFID’s commitment to LNB needs to be backed 
up with better quantified analysis of who is being 
left behind, who is benefiting from interventions, 
and the impact of these efforts. Data is needed 
to demonstrate progress on the LNB agenda, 
disaggregated according to their impacts on the 
quantity and/or status of people supported, and to 
understand the trade-offs and impacts (vis-à-vis 
sustainability and VfM). Ideas for action
> Develop an organisation-wide methodology 
and tools (data driven) for: understanding and 
assessing LNB factors in the local context; 
baseline assessment; an organisational systems 
approach to measuring progress on LNB; 
diagnostics that reflect intersectionality; and 
agreed metrics for measuring LNB progress.
> Organise multi-country discussions to  
evaluate LNB.
> Develop guidance on how to understand and 
manage trade-offs between LNB and VfM.
> Develop a mechanism to track and share 
evidence of what works between country offices, 
programmes, and cadres.
> Develop a methodology that identifies whether 
a situation is one of disadvantaged individuals 
within a functioning community, or whether the 
community itself is unable to thrive.
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      36
Back to contents
Wake up for climate action! 
Issue
People are now being left behind by environment 
and climate risks, and more people will be left 
behind as these problems get worse. While 
environmental degradation and climate change are 
key drivers of poverty and marginalisation, and thus 
central to eradicating extreme poverty and to LNB, 
too often they are not adequately considered in 
development programming. Ideas for action
> Define climate risk as a national security threat 
that reduces economic development and 
increases migration, conflict, and humanitarian 
needs.
> Communicate climate risks better with 
government, business, and the general public – for 
example through television – and outline practical 
actions individuals can undertake.
> Support DFID country offices to understand the 
implications of climate and environmental science 
– for example, using a service providing evidence 
and research on demand. 
> Explore the explicit needs of LNB for resilience to 
climate change. Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      37
Back to contents8. Participants’ comments on the 
conferences
Conference participants were invited to offer 
their reflections in a session at the end of each 
conference, and in a post-conference survey. 
Generally, people were very positive about the 
interactive nature of the event, the use of graphic 
recording, and the opportunities for in-depth cross-
cadre engagement. There was also appreciation 
for how scenario analysis can open up new 
perspectives and questions. Some of the individual 
reactions are given below.
What was your favourite moment?
‘The shocks and resilience session was well 
designed and facilitated’
‘Getting into live problems that DFID offices are 
dealing with’
‘In-depth discussions with cadre advisers over 
dinner covering world events, dealing with  
conflict, service delivery, log-frames and  
project implementation’‘Meeting and working with colleagues from  
other cadres, sharing knowledge and ideas  
had great value’.
What learning needs have you 
identified that now need to be 
addressed?
‘The session on LNB in the context of economic 
development was very revealing. My area of need  
is to understand how to influence economists 
to prioritise the extreme poor and small-scale 
production in their work’
‘I need to be more open to other cadres – I feel that 
I lack knowledge on climate, which is crucial for the 
future of our progress’
‘How to act more politically, both in ring-fencing 
LNB and the poverty-eradicating work at the home 
front, and to be a lot more evidence based and less 
predictive in our work in-country, including anything 
more politically smart’.
 Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      38
Back to contentsAnnex 1.1 – Organisational learning
Table A1: The success factors for good organisational learning
LNB
DFID. (n.d.a). Summary narrative: What leave no one behind 
means for the UK’s work overseas. Unpublished, Department for 
International Development, London.
DFID. (2017a). Leaving no one behind: Our promise. Department 
for International Development. Retrieved from https:/ /www.
gov.uk/government/publications/leaving-no-one-behind-our-
promise/leaving-no-one-behind-our-promise 
United Nations (UN). (2017). Eradicating poverty in all its forms 
and dimensions through promoting sustainable development, 
expanding opportunities and addressing related challenges. 
Report of the Secretary-General, E/2017/64. Retrieved from 
http:/ /undocs.org/E/2017/64
UN video on Leave No One Behind – shown at the 71st session of 
the UN General Assembly. Retrieved from https:/ /www.youtube.
com/watch?v=Vuvys7Wcv3s 
Development Initiatives. (2017). The P20 initiative: Data to leave 
no one behind. Retrieved from http:/ /devinit.org/post/p20-
initiative-data-to-leave-no-one-behind/ 
Lea, N. (2017). Tackling extreme poverty and leaving no-
one behind. PowerPoint Presentation given at the DFID LNB 
conference in Bristol, 13 November. Unpublished, Department for 
International Development. Kirsch, M. (2018). Leave no one behind (LNB) mainstreaming 
in practice: DFID’s LNB trailblazer countries. Presentation 
given at the DFID LNB conference in Bristol, 23 February 2018. 
Unpublished, Department for International Development.
UNDP. (2018). What does it mean to leave no one behind? 
(Discussion Paper). United Nations Development Programme. 
Retrieved from http:/ /www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/
librarypage/poverty-reduction/what-does-it-mean-to-leave-no-
one-behind-.html
OECD. (2018). Development co-operation report 2018: 
Joining forces to leave no one behind. Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. Retrieved from 
https:/ /www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/dcr-2018-en.
pdf?expires=1543941960&id=id&accname=guest 
&checksum=ED798CD8944DDA76265D2AEA8AA844CE 
ODI. (2018). ‘Leave no one behind’ index 2018. Overseas 
Development Institute. Retrieved from https:/ /www.odi.org/
publications/11159-leave-no-one-behind-index-2018 Culture and leadership Skills and capabilities Tools and systems
Learning as a strategic 
investment:
Be clear this is a corporate priority  
and will help the organisation 
maximise its impact
Invest time and resources to support 
organisational learning and track 
improvementsEngagement and commitment:
This is everyone’s responsibility
Positive recognition for those  
doing well
Build staff capability: to use evidence 
and know-how, to apply collaborative 
learning practices and help others to 
do this
Surge supportEvidence-based decision-making:
Be clear on evidence used to inform 
decisions (knowledge and know-how)
Watch out for optimism bias, and be 
clear when we do not have enough 
evidence
Identify and target priority gaps
Stakeholder involvement:
Involve a wide range of partners in 
our learning efforts – learn from them, 
share what we learn, joint approaches
Avoid groupthink: diversity, external 
challengeMaking it safe to learn:
Protect time and space for learning
Encourage people to talk about what 
is not working as well as what is. Learn 
from mistakes, do not just move onLearning is embedded in the 
delivery process:
Systematic not sporadic
Requires collective effort
New ways of working
Leadership role modelling:
Open debates
Ask the questions: What have you 
learnt? 
Have you shared this? What do you not 
know? How can we help?Leadership in connected 
networks:
Connections not collections: 
communities of practice (internal  
and external)
Build demand not just supply  
iterative approachesSystems for capturing and 
sharing lessons:
Primary focus on people/networks
Fit for purpose technology (support 
collaborative working, smart searching, 
portfolio data, institutional memory)9. Annexes
Annex 1.2 – References and resourcesSource: Adapted from DFID (n.d.b, p.3). Leaving No One Behind Perspectives and Directions from DFID Multi-Cadre Conferences       
      39
Back to contentsBuilding stability
DFID. (2016). Building stability framework. Department for 
International Development. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5968990ded915d0baf00019e/
UK-Aid-Connect-Stability-Framework.pdf 
DFID. (2017b). Economic development strategy: Prosperity, 
poverty and meeting global challenges. Department for 
International Development. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/587374/DFID-Economic-Development-
Strategy-2017.pdf
ICAI. (2017). DFID’s approach to supporting inclusive growth 
in Africa: A learning review. Independent Commission for Aid 
Impact. Retrieved from https:/ /icai.independent.gov.uk/html-
report/dfids-approach-supporting-inclusive-growth-africa/ 
Organisational learning 
DFID. (n.d.b). DFID – a learning organisation. Presentation. 
Retrieved from https:/ /usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/
what_good_looks_like_dfid_collison.pdf
ICAI. (2014). How DFID learns (Review). Independent Commission 
for Aid Impact. Retrieved from https:/ /icai.independent.gov.uk/
report/dfid-learns/ 
Scenarios
Avis, W. (2017). Scenario thinking and usage among development 
actors (K4D Helpdesk Report 221). Brighton, UK: Institute of 
Development Studies. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/media/5a5f3256ed915d7dfea66cde/221_
Scenario_Thinking_-_Usage_Among_Development_Actors.pdf 
Government Office for Science. (2017). The futures toolkit. 
Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/ uploads/attachment_data/
file/674209/futures-toolkit-edition-1.pdf 
Rhydderch, A. (2009). Scenario planning (Guidance Note). 
Government Office for Science. Retrieved from http:/ /webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140108141323/http:/ /www.bis.gov.
uk/assets/foresight/docs/horizon-scanning-centre/foresight_
scenario_planning.pdf 
Shell. (2012). Shell scenarios – imagining the future. Video. 
Retrieved from https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=srY-hJuqYTM 
Shell. (2013). Impact and influence of Shell scenarios. Video. 
Retrieved from https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=3nuPYPllBuw 
Spinney, L. (2018). End of days: Is Western civilisation on the brink 
of collapse? New Scientist. 17 January. Retrieved from https:/ /
www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731610-300-end-of-days-
is-western-civilisation-on-the-brink-of-collapse/ 
Rozen, Uri. (2016). Game theory. TEDx Talks video. Ben 
Gurion University. Retrieved from https:/ /www.youtube.com/
watch?time_continue=5&v=uCEE5XuxmuI Gender
DFID. (2018a). DFID strategic vision for gender equality: A call to 
action for her potential, our future. Department for International 
Development. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/708116/Strategic-vision-gender-equality1.pdf 
UN Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel (UNHLP). (2016). 
Leave no one behind: A call to action for gender equality and 
women’s economic empowerment. Report of the UN Secretary-
General’s High-Level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment. 
Retrieved from http:/ /www2.unwomen.org/-/media/hlp%20wee/
attachments/reports-toolkits/hlp-wee-report-2016-09-call-to-
action-en.pdf?la=en&vs=1028 
Disability
DFID. (2015). Disability framework – one year on. Leaving no one 
behind. Department for International Development. Retrieved 
from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/554802/DFID-
Disability-Framework-2015.pdf 
Digital development 
DFID. (2018b). Digital strategy 2018 to 2020: Doing development 
in a digital world. Department for International Development. 
Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/701443/DFID-Digital-Strategy-23-01-18a.pdf 
Herbert, S. (2017). Digital development and the digital gender gap 
(K4D Helpdesk Report). Brighton, UK: Institute of Development 
Studies. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
media/5a5f228f40f0b652634c6f4a/249-Digital-development-
and-the-digital-gender-gap.pdf
Herbert, S. (2017). Digital inclusion – recent trends and 
messages (K4D Helpdesk Report 237). Brighton, UK: Institute 
of Development Studies. Retrieved from https:/ /opendocs.ids.
ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/123456789/13358/237%20
Digital%20inclusion%20%E2%80%93%20recent%20trends%20
and%20messages.pdf?sequence=1 
Climate and environment 
Mittal, N., Perera, N. & Korkeala, O. (2016). Learning materials: 
Leaving no-one behind in the climate and environment context. 
Evidence on Demand. Retrieved from https:/ /www.gov.uk/dfid-
research-outputs/learning-materials-leaving-no-one-behind-in-
the-climate-and-environment-context 
ICAI. (2018). DFID’s transport and urban infrastructure 
investments: A performance review. Independent Commission 
for Aid Impact. Retrieved from https:/ /icai.independent.gov.uk/
wp-content/uploads/DFIDs-transport-and-urban-infrastructure-
investments.pdf 
Rajé, F. (2016). Leave no one behind: Infrastructure and inclusion 
(K4D Helpdesk Report). Brighton, UK: Institute of Development 
Studies. Retrieved from https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/media/5aafd3b7ed915d1d03ce1f22/Infrastructure_and_
Inclusion.pdf
Global Infrastructure Hub. (2018). Inclusive Infrastructure 
and Social Equity. Retrieved from https:/ /gihub-webtools.
s3.amazonaws.com/umbraco/media/2437/gih_
inclusiveinfrastructure_full-document_web_art_hr.pdfContact
Email: info@K4D.info 
Twitter: @K4D_info 
Website: https:/ /www.ids.ac.uk/K4D
