1
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASCGD Note
SEPTEMBER 2020
Link It, Open It, Use It 
Changing How Education Data Are 
Used to Generate Ideas
Jack Rossiter
Data-driven decision-making is in the spotlight in 2020, with the public expecting data to guide gov-
ernment choices during ongoing emergencies, including COVID-19. Within education systems, lead-
ers want to know what the data can tell them about when to reopen schools, how to prevent learning 
loss, how to gauge dropout risk, how to encourage re-enrolment, where to deploy teachers to manage 
class sizes, and how to meet the needs of students when they return to schools.
In response, countries have scrambled to setup systems that track health and economic indicators and 
monitor equity and mobility issues that may have been caused by government action. Yet as ministries 
of education plan their recovery, many rely on data systems which fail to provide the information 
needed to target attention; and as planners seek to learn from past emergencies in similar contexts, 
they are finding that public data on basic indicators like re-enrolment and teacher supply do not exist. 
Beyond urgent needs, our current crisis is drawing attention to long-standing flaws in education data 
systems.
In this note, I discuss a new approach to how national administrative education data—records of school 
census, public exams, school inspection, teacher payroll, and other operational matters, collected on 
routine basis—are integrated, shared, and used to generate knowledge. Drawing on examples from 
low- and middle-income countries, I demonstrate (a) how integrating and making available adminis-
trative data will deliver relevant policy and operational insights; (b) how this approach can engage in-
dividuals with the skills and incentives to solve data and policy problems with ministries of education; 
and (c) how increasing data use can be the fastest path to improving what is collected. I present Open 
Data for Education System Analysis as a strategy to change the way education data are used to facilitate 
better analysis and evidence for education.
THE PROBLEM 
Researchers often produce high-quality evidence, but it is expensive to generate, tends to be small-
scale and insulated from political economy challenges, and can miss the questions that are important 
to education policymakers. At the same time, governments are making large and regular investments 
in gathering data, often driven by top-down requirements from development partners. But they get 
very little in return: despite substantial government and partner support to statistical capacity, the 2
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASskills and systems needed for integration are unavailable in most education ministries. Data remain 
disjointed, and severe limits on who can access them internally and externally mean that they are 
barely used. This matters: a growing body of evidence1 suggests that growth and development are 
slower where access to data and research materials are limited; and while some findings are transfer-
able, analysis using local data is often a better guide to policy than experimental estimates from a dif-
ferent context.2 This suggests a benefit to countries from maintaining their education administrative 
data and letting people use it.3
THE SOLUTION 
Governments should integrate and open access to national administrative data, then support analysts 
to use it. Annual school census data are useful, but they have far fewer uses than merged school cen-
sus, public exams, and teacher payroll data. Once integrated, these data can answer questions that are 
impossible to answer with survey data alone, and they are particularly well-suited to policy evaluation 
at a scale that matters to decision makers. Integrated administrative data are comprehensive and rep-
resentative, covering whole populations in which it is possible to detect modest but meaningful rela-
tionships with precision, even in sub-groups. Their use allows officials to identify, in real-time, where 
existing policies require adjustment. This is not about creating a top-down, command and control ed-
ucation system. Instead, by opening access as a strategy, governments can leverage their data to attract 
individuals and organizations with the skills to support data integration and generate relevant ideas. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
If we want to see evidence used to drive educational improvements, then governments and govern-
ment data should be our priority. A central message of the 2021 World Development Report will be that 
“much of the value of data is untapped, waiting to be realized .” Experience in 2020 has revealed how 
urgently data systems and practices need to transform so that governments can use the data that they 
collect and hold. Open Data for Education System Analysis is a strategy to facilitate analysis of high 
social value and—ultimately—of better evidence for educational development.
THE PROBLEM: HUGE DEMAND FOR INSIGHTS AND LOTS OF DA TA … 
THAT ARE BARELY USED4  
Governments generate the vast majority of data on education. Line ministries routinely produce 
huge datasets that encompass nearly entire populations.5 As a result, there is an abundance of edu-
cation administrative data related to services provided, the people who access those services, and the 
outcomes of those services. 
Generating population-level data requires substantial resources. An estimate for 77 of the world’s 
lower-income countries6 put the annual cost of utilizing survey, census, and administrative data to 
monitor the full set of Sustainable Development Goals at around $1 billion. Around 10 percent of this 
was for improving and implementing Education Management Information Systems’ (EMIS) annual 
data collection and analysis—roughly US$1.0 to $1.5 million per country per year.7
National administrative data are comprehensive and representative—and this matters to policy-
makers. These data, by virtue of their population-level nature and the frequency of observation, allow 3
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASanalysts to follow districts, schools, and sometimes students over time. They provide the level of cover-
age and disaggregation that officials demand for policy applications. In 2017 , AidData fielded two sur-
veys of policymakers in low- and middle-income countries: Listening to Leaders and the Education Snap 
Poll.8 Participants were asked what information they value the most when making decisions and why. 
Overwhelmingly, education decision-makers prioritize their administrative data systems as sources of 
timely, disaggregated, and locally relevant information, to inform resourcing and planning processes.
International support to statistical capacity is vast and continues to grow. Donor commitments 
to statistics and statistical capacity doubled over the decade to 2017 , with the World Bank leading in 
aid to statistics.9 In the education sector, between 1998 and 2017 the World Bank funded 279 projects 
with EMIS components in 98 countries. The number of new projects continues to rise in each period 
(Figure 1) and the country count understates the full scale of the efforts, as there are EMIS regional 
projects as well.10 A 2017 study showed that the average cost of the World Bank’s EMIS development and 
strengthening activities ranged between US$1 million and $7 million per project.11
Figure 1. Number of new World Bank operations with EMIS activities, by region and start date
Source: EdStats Database: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/wDashboard/dqemis4
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASDespite all the activity, within ministries of education, capacity to produce data vastly outstrips 
ability to use it. From research and reviews into EMIS activities since 1998, there are several examples of projects improving data collection but failing to improve data use:
•Timor-Leste has introduced EMIS infr
astructure and applications and improved data collection
and processing, but “no capacity is found as yet within the EMIS for exploitation of the databasefor analytical work … [or] to underpin policy making.” 
12
•Ghana’s Ministry of Education geared its systems towards pro
ducing, compiling, and generating
a statistics yearbook but after release “lack of utilization of data was a major problem.”13
•Researchers suggest that India’s EMIS reforms ha ve changed the role of local officials from identi-
fying, deliberating, and communicating challenges faced by schools into “merely collecting datapoints and feeding checklists and formats to the higher authorities in as little time as possible.”
14
•In Ethiopia, education and social protection programs have included regular and large invest-ments in the EMIS system since 2009.
15 Such is the lack of impact on statistical capacity that a
decade later, the latest program finds “deficient or inadequate systems for data collection andanalysis” and includes payments of $2 million and $3 million if the education ministry publishesan annual statistical abstract and a single analytical report, respectively.
16
Periodic assessments of country EMIS are also carried out under the SABER initiative, a World Bank 
initiative to produce comparative data on education policies and institutions. SABER assessments 
show similar limits to data access and use (Figure 2).17
Figure 2. Data use as the main constraint to more effective EMIS across countries
Note: The figure shows average ratings across 4 goals and 19 dimensions, for the 11 countries that have been 
surveyed using World Bank SABER-EMIS tool to date. Max score on any dimension is 4. Goal 1: 
enabling 
environment  2.4 Goal 2: 
system soundness  2.1 Goal 3: 
quality  
data  2.4 Goal 4: 
utilization in  
decision making  1.5 
organizational 
structure  3.2 data 
architecture  2.5 methodological 
soundness  2.7 accessibility  2.0 
infrastructural 
capacity  2.7 serviceability  2.5 accuracy and 
reliability  2.4 disseminating 
findings  1.8 
human 
resources  2.4 dynamic 
system  2.4 periodicity and 
timeliness  2.2 operational use  1.7 
legal framework  2.2 data analytics  1.9 integrity  2.0 openness  1.5 
budget  2.1 data coverage  1.6 
data-driven 
culture  2.0 5
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASConcerns with data quality contribute to low utilization.18 Gathering large quantities of data quickly 
and for multiple purposes impacts quality. The reliability and accuracy of education administrative 
data is often questioned, for example, on where teachers are located or how well they are perform-
ing.19 This is for good reason: management decisions such as teacher promotions or the allocation of 
school grants are high-stakes. But rather than undermining administrative systems, discrepancies 
highlight the need for better integration of data sources, to improve accuracy.20 In large-scale system 
diagnosis and policy analysis, such as in understanding relationships between teacher supply and 
student attainment, measurement errors for individual observations matter far less. Here imperfect 
administrative data are well-suited.21
More importantly, support to statistical capacity has been driven by global needs and has over-
looked country demand.22 Many international initiatives on statistical capacity building have been 
excessively supply-driven, focusing on global reporting and accountability pressures, and concerned 
with improving the availability of indicators or filling gaps in data series.23 Indeed, a United Nations 
inspection report covering 43 countries highlights good work on establishing statistical standards but 
goes on to criticize the lack of support to the effective use of data by national stakeholders.24 A focus on 
monitoring global goals has detracted from the local demand for data and subnational analysis need-
ed to actually achieve the goals.25 As noted in a United Nations Joint Inspection Unit report: 
“If countries are going to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and go beyond simply 
monitoring progress towards the targets [then] this requires support for the development 
of national capacities to explore the wealth of data often produced by national statistical 
systems and to undertake deeper analysis, not just of trends but of the underlying causes of 
the obstacles to achieving national development goals.”26
Severe limits on data linking and access mean that education administrative data are barely used, 
even by individuals with the relevant skills. The core of most countries’ EMIS is the annual school 
census. This indicates enrolment trends but taken alone it cannot be used to answer, for example, 
whether school and teacher characteristics—and the policies that affect them—are associated with bet-
ter learning outcomes,27 or which schools and districts add value rather than just admitting better 
students. Internal and external access limitations and a lack of “openness” also contribute to a scarcity 
of research using national administrative data.28 In a 2017 review of education data availability across 
133 low- and middle-income countries, 61 have no available data and 43 have data only at the national 
level. Of the 29 countries that do have disaggregated data, the majority are in PDF or non-download-
able format and only 16 countries provide information from student assessments.29 In a database of 
papers from 15 leading outlets that publish papers in the economics of education, there are hardly any 
articles that use administrative data from Africa or Asia over the period 1990–2014 (Table 1). In South 
America—driven by Chile—there are several entries, but it is in North America and Europe where ad-
ministrative data are being used to generate context-specific evidence. This is a recent phenomenon, 
with rapid increase in output over time made possible through enhanced cooperation between gov-
ernmental agencies and analysts.30 6
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASTable 1. Number of education studies that make use of administrative data
Source: Figlio et al. (2015), Education Research and Administrative Data.31 Note: the authors are transparent in stating that “It is possible 
that this is a substantial overstatement of the North American share of education economics research using administrative data because of 
possible publication biases of the journals that we selected for inclusion, but again, our charge is not to be comprehensive in our survey.”
The underutilization of administrative data matters for educational development. For many public 
policy questions, findings cannot be imported: the local context is complex and affects both the ques-tions that are most important and the research findings that can answer those questions.
32 Indeed, 
where we have conflicting estimates of the same intervention across varying contexts, the non-ex-perimental results from the right context are very often a better guide to policy than experimental results from elsewhere.
33 Governments across sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia do make regular 
investments in collecting data that are relevant to education decision-makers, but these are rarely available and barely used. In a recent study summarising 27 ,000 economics journal articles written on the 54 countries of Africa, 45 percent are about five countries, accounting for just 16 percent of the continent’s population.
34 Where more data are available, countries have higher volumes of research. 
Elsewhere, underutilisation matters: where access to data and research materials are limited, growth and development are slower.
35 Policymakers concerned about the lack of locally relevant evidence can 
help by lowering the costs associated with obtaining data for both local and foreign analysts.36
Case study 1. Competitively funded education research centers in Chile37, 38, 39N. America E urope S. America Africa Asia Oceania
253 85 18 6 4 1
Chile (11)
Colombia (3)Peru (2)Uruguay (1)Venezuela (1)Kenya (4)Benin (1)Uganda (1)China (3)Taiwan (1)Australia (1)
Chile
A lesson from Chile’s educational 
reforms is that “none of them would 
have taken place if it not for a relative abundance of quality data and 
research. ”
●Opening access to administrative data 
through 2000s
●Research partnerships with national 
universities and think tanks
●Financial support to data use through a 
competitive fund for Education Research
CentersMain featuresAvailability of student achievement data in the 1990s attracted a range of international and local researchers. 
In the mid -2000s the National Science and Technology 
Agency launched a competitive fund for education research centers. Several centers now exist --e.g. at the 
University of Chile --and the country has a large policy 
network of experts in universities, think tanks, and foundations. These individuals work with national data 
and influence policy with their ability to build consensus 
on technical issues including, most recently, the 
Bachelet government’s reforms that restructured 
teacher careers. As seen earlier, there are more top -
quality papers using Chilean administrative data than 
are available using similar data from all African and 
Asian countries combined.7
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASA SOLUTION: INTEGRATE AND OPEN DATA, THEN SUPPORT ANALYSTS TO USE IT 
If we want to see evidence used to drive improvements in education systems, then governments and 
government data should be our priority. Here, I discuss what may be needed to see the trends in North 
America—and Chile—discussed above mirrored or surpassed in low- and middle-income countries 
over the next decade.
1. Integrate datasets 
Good, clean EMIS data are useful, but linking EMIS with other administrative datasets— public 
exams, national assessments, school inspection, teacher payroll—will vastly increase its potential. 
Efforts to increase EMIS availability, through “data dashboards,” for example, may improve account-
ing and management for activities that are logistical in nature.40 But ensuring learning and schooling 
for all is complex, and cannot be achieved without a dramatic change in the way we combine and use 
data. Linked data allow us to examine things like equity in resource allocation, including key dimen-
sions such as teacher quality, or identify relatively high-performing districts and schools and test re-
lationships between school inspection and student achievement.
Once integrated, administrative data offer opportunities to answer questions of types —and in 
ways—that are impossible with survey data. The large datasets offer enormous statistical power, often 
with millions of observations in which it is possible to detect modest but meaningful relationships 
with precision. When used well, they provide the level of disaggregation that officials need for policy 
applications (Figure 3) and allow the study of heterogeneous effects of educational policies: it becomes 
possible to see how effects vary across different groups of individuals, and if they differ, how they 
differ, and for whom.41 Rare events which arrive suddenly, such as disease outbreaks, climatic events, 
or other policy-related natural experiments, almost certainly do not have prospective data collection, 
but may be studied in high-frequency administrative data.42 Furthermore, working with “real-time” data 
Figure 3. Education ministries need the high-frequency data linked to subnational units that is 
available in administrative data but less so in nationally representative surveys
Note: Change from country to province to district level when assessing variation in wealth. Governments require the third figure (and 
arguably even more disaggregation) for policy applications.
Source: AtlasAI, https://medium.com/atlasai/the-tyranny-of-national-statistics-d3a79af526a9
8
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASprovides opportunities to study the effects of recent policies and increases the chances of analysis be-
ing relevant to current choices and decisions.43
Because data coverage is universal, it is feasible to link data from one domain (e.g. education) to 
data from another domain (e.g. social protection).44 Making these connections rapidly expands the 
value of each individual dataset and, for example, knowing whether a district’s children are mostly 
very poor matters in understanding and responding to that district’s performance.
Careful data integration can also improve data quality—both its accuracy and its serviceability. 
A technical perspective on quality refers to completeness, consistency, accuracy: characteristics that 
make data appropriate for a specific use; but as seen in the Listening to Leaders data, senior govern-
ment officials want data that are timely, relevant, and actionable.45 Do available data predict anything 
about continued enrolment or achievement, or school safety? If not, then why are they being collect-
ed? Which indicators are no use? Which are treacherous? The more that countries combine and inter-
rogate education administrative data, the quicker they can identify what is worth collecting, what has 
limited analytical value, and what is missing (an approach that is being used in Sierra Leone). This is a 
type of user-centered design, working back from needs and adapting the data systems to satisfy these; 
it is quite the opposite of traditional supply-side approaches to EMIS design.
Case study 2. Predictive analysis using population-level data in Sierra Leone46
Sierra Leone
“Data scientists at Sierra Leone’s 
Directorate of Science, Technology and 
Innovation are using advanced 
analytical methods to explore and 
analyze administrative data collected 
from schools. ”
●Integrated enrolment and exams data for 
all schools
●Data use partnership across government 
departments
●Public access to disaggregated data via 
Education Data HubMain featuresIn 2018, the government of Sierra Leone abolished 
school fees and launched the Free and Quality 
Education Program. The Ministry of Basic and Senior 
Secondary Education partnered with the newly formed 
Directorate of Science, Technology and Innovation to 
take advantage of their skills. The directorate integrates 
education administrative data, provides open access 
and uses predictive analysis, data visualization and 
machine learning methods to analyze administrative 
data collected from schools. The partnership makes it 
easier for ministry officials to understand the statistics, 
the factors that affect the performance of students and 
to use the results for resource allocation.
As we have seen, however, investments in the skills for integration and use are rarely made, leav-
ing data units in most ministries understaffed. One of the lessons of the past 20 years is that top-
down initiatives have not led to sustained increases in capacity.47 In the education sector, while proj-
ects have for decades sought to develop human capital, skills development has typically focused on 
education planning, with little attention paid to developing programs for statistics or IT skills in the 
education sector.48 Statistical Capacity Indicators show that overall capacity in government is lowest 
in sub-Saharan Africa and although several countries have made progress, several others have fallen 
back (Figure 4); there has been very little improvement overall in the 15 years to 2018. 9
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEAS2. Make data open access so officials, social scientists, and practitioners can contribute 
skills and generate insights 
Linking datasets is important, but the step change comes from providing access for motivated 
individuals and organizations to work with administrative data. Persistently low internal capacity 
does not mean that progress must remain slow. There are individuals with the skills, incentives, and 
time, who may not work for government but who are willing and able to collaborate to solve specific 
data problems. Opening access is a strategy to draw in these specialists to facilitate system diagnosis 
and policy evaluation.49
A major strength of administrative data is its (potentially) immediate availability, at relatively 
low additional cost. Partner institutions can be enlisted to support data linking, hosting and sharing, 
removing that burden from ministries of education (e.g. in the case of South Africa), and these data 
can be used across government offices for management and operational decisions. Rather than sup-
planting them—as is often the case with surveys or large-scale international assessments—public-use 
administrative data platforms increase the analytical value of existing national systems. 
To get there, the gains in performance earned through better analysis must outweigh the per-
ceived losses from public oversight. Incentives to increase data access are not always aligned within 
governments. Governments need data and insights to make better decisions and officials may even 
find that increasing data availability is a way of signalling a commitment to certain reforms.50 But 
these same data may expose the shortcomings of policies and lead to demands for change.51 Govern-
ments may fear that the data may be used to present too simplistic a picture in a complex system, or 
that their release may hamper public support for policies that will work, if only “given enough time.” 
52 For politicians facing electoral pressures, releasing data may undermine the credibility of campaign 
promises or provide ammunition to the opposition.Figure 4. Overall statistical capacity has increased (slightly) in sub-Saharan Africa—and more so in 
South Asia—from 2004 to 2018 
Source: World Bank Statistical Capacity Indicators Database, mapped for 2004 (earliest year) and 2018 (most recent year).
10
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASCase study 3. Efficiency gains through data partnerships in South Africa53 
There are practical reasons why officials are hesitant to share the data that they are entrusted to 
protect.54 A challenge in navigating data access stems from the absence of legal frameworks and clear 
responsibilities in many systems.55 The production and dissemination of official statistics is the core or 
even exclusive task of national statistical offices but for other producers, such as ministries of educa-
tion and exam bodies, generating data and statistics is one of several tasks, not the most important.56 
Engaging statistics offices can often help to avoid conflicts of interest and improve connections be-
tween producers and users.57, 58 Finding an appropriate solution in each setting is not straightforward, 
but there is precedent (including the cases in this note) for finding practical ways of opening access. 
These need not require enormous changes to practice: clear data policies can afford, for example, 
(a) direct access to microdata stripped of individual identifying information, (b) fair and transparent 
processes for access, and (c) systems that ensure immediate disclosure of statistical results and find-
ings to interested government stakeholders.
The major benefit of increasing access is the opportunity for officials, social scientists, and prac-
titioners to combine skills and generate better ideas. Getting data into the hands of the right indi-
viduals and institutions can support government systems with advanced skills and quickly change the 
way that insights are produced, with large spillover benefits.59 Instead of waiting until ministry data 
units have all the expertise, by working across institutions, governments and their staff benefit from 
improved approaches to data analysis, providing a faster path to evidence and one which offers sub-
stantial benefits for skills development.60 It isn’t just a matter of presenting data in more impressive 
formats;61 these data can tell us what small experiments miss: general equilibrium effects, political 
economy, and government implementation challenges.
By opening access governments can leverage their data and encourage analysts to provide answers 
to specific questions. In the right hands, even imperfect administrative data are well suited to sys-
tem diagnosis and policy evaluation, particularly where issues are stark (i.e. where we are not trying 
to identify tiny margins) and persistent (i.e. the ones that officials probably want to tackle the most). 
South Africa
“Researchers who access data also are 
required to present the research output 
to the department. This is to ensure that 
greater access to data actually leads to 
better informed policy and practice in 
the South African government.”
●Data hosted by third -party providing 
management and documentation benefits 
to government
●Simple protocols ensure privacy is 
maintained and laws are met
●Impact evaluations of national policies 
have been possible because of access to 
these administrative dataMain featuresIn the South African Department of Basic Education 
data use is being extended in at least two ways.  (1) a 
set of protocols has been developed to ensure a 
transparent application process for external researchers 
to request data, to review requests and to facilitate the 
sharing of data. Researchers are also required to 
present findings to officials, ensuring that greater data 
access leads to better informed policy and practice. (2) 
a partnership has been established with DataFirst to 
share administrative data through an online portal --one 
of numerous examples showing that it is possible to 
provide secure access to de -identified administrative 
data. Thanks to these initiatives, at least three impact 
evaluations (of the Grade R Preschool Programme, the 
Language in Education Policy, and the impact of sub -
national administrations) have been possible.11
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASStatistical capacity within government is not improving quickly, but a supply of integrated govern-
ment data solves a problem for analysts who can be incentivized to tackle questions that governments 
want answers to (an approach that has been used in Peru). Another approach would be to bring in 
analytical capacity to support the process, but this would reduce the efficiency and skills benefits from 
working across institutions. 
Case study 4. Leveraging government data to attract analysts to Peru62
HOW TO MAKE IT HAPPEN 
Integrating administrative data and making it accessible to officials, social scientists, and prac-
titioners would capitalize on the huge investments made in data and allow governments to fast-
track the generation of ideas. This note focuses on national administrative systems because they are 
comprehensive, representative, contextually relevant, and can be used to meet local demand for in-
sights on management, operational and policy decisions:
 •Informing management: which teachers are licensed; how much are they being paid and does pay 
arrive on time; how has the number of girls enrolled in a district changed in the past three years; 
what are the warning signs of dropout?
 •Improving operational processes and choices: which school inspection indicators best predict student 
learning; at what ages do students leave the system and where should additional support be 
provided; what is the sampling frame—with contextual variables—for a national learning assess-
ment?
 •Guiding policy reform: what is the relationship between language of instruction and student perfor-
mance; what are the characteristics of the districts that are adding most value to student achieve-
ment, relative to resources; and what was the impact, across provinces, of the teacher salary 
reform on girls’ attainment?
Peru
“MineduLAB intentionally connects 
Peruvian researchers to opportunities to 
conduct research with the Ministry of 
Education’s administrative data. ”
●Government leverages data to attract 
skills from international research 
organisations
●Emphasis on cost -effectiveness of new 
policies, which may then be taken to scale
●Evaluations use administrative data : so 
lower -cost and quicker than with primary 
data collectionMain featuresMineduLAB was developed as a collaboration between 
the Ministry of Education in Peru, J -PAL, IPA and the 
World Bank. MineduLAB connects researchers to 
opportunities to conduct research with the Ministry of 
Education’s administrative data. Working with 
researchers in this way contributes to the development 
of a wider field of actors promoting data and evidence 
use in policy -making, by influencing and connecting 
their academic institutions and government network. 
MineduLAB prioritises innovations that can be 
implemented at low cost and evaluated using existing 
administrative data, which reduces barriers to piloting 
and scaling up. Good administrative data significantly 
reduce the costs of evaluation, including at scale, 
making it easier to generate evidence on ongoing policy 
commitments.12
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASPartnerships are required to make this happen. Progress requires a step away from traditional ap-
proaches of strengthening data units within ministries. Several of the countries that are making the 
most progress in drawing analytical value from administrative data have done so through increasing 
access and developing strong partnerships with universities and other agencies, where most of the 
analytical work is done. Partnerships at three levels will change who is involved in the processing and 
use of data and how they interact (Figure 5). 
Success rests on decision-makers seeing the value in using and sharing data. First, by enlisting 
co-creators, governments benefit from specialist skills in data linking and can rapidly increase the 
pace of integration and sharing. Data and research institutions holding relationships with ministries 
of education, exam bodies, and statistical offices bring contextual knowledge and can provide as-
surances regarding systems of data protection and anonymization. Second, together with education 
ministries, co-creators can steer an analytical agenda for local research organizations. The supply of 
integrated data solves a problem for these organizations which can dedicate the time to producing tar-
geted outputs. Third, individuals in these organizations already have the skills and incentives to work 
with data but their engagement will usually require financial, and in some cases technical, support. 
These resources may be provided by government, e.g. as part of a call for papers, or by nongovernmen-
tal organizations.
Failure would be signalled by an inability of data users to produce actionable ideas, or by ideas 
having no impact on educational development. The associations between administrative data avail-
ability and the production of ideas,63 and between ideas and development, are supported by a growing 
body of literature.64 But it is not certain that they will hold across low- and middle-income countries, 
or in any education sector with limited capacity or initial interest in using data.65 Should these ideas 
find traction then it may be possible to contribute to the evidence on connections. Equally, access to 
more and better data cannot always be the solution and these signals—i.e. that data access is not in-
creasing analytical output, or that this output is not entering the policy-making process—may serve as 
useful stopping conditions.
Ministries of Education, Exam 
Bodies and Statistics OfficesData holders
●MoE & Exam Bodies ’ key role is in 
production of admin & assessment data
●Need to be convinced of v alue in 
analytical products
●Collaborate to link EMIS, exams, teacher 
payroll etc.Co-creators
●Local universities & analysts maintain 
relationships with MoE, exam bodies 
and statistics offices
●Possess system knowledge to guide 
and steer analytical work and 
strengthen partnership s●Proof of value of open data is local 
research ers’ i nvolve ment in analysis
●Complementary funding calls and 
fellowships support this goal
●Data holders onboard to drive agendaCo-creators
Local researchers and research 
organizationsAnalystsAnalysts
Local researchers and research 
organizations
●First, M oEs need to be convinced of the 
value of using and sharing data
●Second, they need confidence in systems 
of data protection and anonymization●Local universities and analysts bring 
technical skills
●Individuals and their institutions will want 
credit for outputs●Local researchers lack data, funded time, 
and in some cases technical mentoring
●Open access tackles first, international 
partners will invest in the latter twoLocal & international data and 
research institutions
Assurance Credit FundingFigure 5. Three layers of partnerships required to make it happen
Source: Adapted from a CGD Education Programme internal note prepared by Justin Sandefur.13
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASThis proposal is pragmatic. Scarce skills are needed to integrate and analyze data, and these are not 
always within government. Data cleaning, linking, archiving and documentation is tedious work and 
it is hard to focus efforts on these tasks, making it difficult to get the organization to go that last mile, 
even if it is committed to it in principle.66 The proposed approach requires collaboration to draw in 
skills and expertise of those incentivized to complete the job, adding strength to the overall statistical 
system. Cooperation of this type will arise if all parties can share the benefits of the output and prece-
dents for this kind of cooperation exist, including those country cases described in this note.
It can also rapidly improve the use and usefulness of national administrative data. By working 
backwards from the bureaucrats’, policymakers’, and school leaders’ demands for information, part-
ners can work with integrated data to quickly identify what is worth collecting, what has limited an-
alytical value and what is missing. This provides a far faster path to relevant data and insights than 
a redesign in a central office, based on general concerns with data coverage in questionnaires and 
reliability of leading indicators. 
By prioritizing integration and open access, it is possible to fundamentally shift the way that edu-
cation data are used to generate ideas. The proposed approach is not interested in using data to create 
a top-down, command and control education system; it is about linking and then using administra-
tive data to generate ideas for educational development. Investments in integrating national data are 
relatively cheap and offer insight into a wide range of questions. Providing a high degree of access to 
these data makes empirical analysis in education more feasible, more believable and more relevant. 
The whole purpose of any data system is for its output to be used—this approach can rapidly increase 
how existing data are used to produce good ideas.6714
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEASENDNOTES
1  See e.g. Das, J., Do, Q.T., Shaines, K., Srikant, S., 2013. US and them: the geography of academic research. J. Dev. Econ. 105, 
112–130; Furman, J., Stern, S., 2011. Climbing atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of Institutions on Cumulative Research. 
American Economic Review, 101 (5): 1933–63.
2  Pritchett, L., Sandefur, J., 2014. Context Matters for Size: Why External Validity Claims and Development Practice do not Mix, 
Journal of Globalization and Development, De Gruyter, vol. 4(2), 161–197 .
3  Card, David, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. Expanding access to administrative data for research in 
the United States. Washington, DC: National Science Foun- dation White Paper No. 10–069.
4  UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2017), The Data Revolution in Education, Information Paper No. 39. Paris: UNESCO; & Read, 
L,. Atinc, T., 2017 . Information for Accountability: Transparency and Citizen Engagement for Improved Service Delivery in Ed-
ucation Systems, Brookings Global Economy and Development Working Paper 99.
5  Custer, S. Sethi, T. (Eds.), 2017 . Avoiding Data Graveyards: Insights from Data Producers and Users in Three Countries. Wil-
liamsburg, VA: AidData at the College of William & Mary.
6  77 countries that qualified for concessional borrowing through the International Development Association (IDA) at the time of 
the original report.
7  Data for Development: A Needs Assessment for SDG Monitoring and Statistical Capacity Development (2015). Sustainable De-
velopment Solutions Network.
8  Custer, S., King, E., Atinc, T., Read, L., Sethi, T., 2018. Toward Data-Driven Education Systems: More Data and More Evidence 
Use, Journal of International Cooperation in Education, Vol.20–2/21–2 (2018) pp. 5–34
9  PARIS21 (2019), “Partner Report on Support to Statistics 2019”, Paris.
10  Honig, D., Pritchett, L. (2019). The Limits of Accounting-Based Accountability in Education (and Far Beyond): Why More Ac-
counting Will Rarely Solve Accountability Problems, CGD Working Paper 510.
11  Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017 . Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management In-
formation System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1056-5.
12  Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017 . Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management In-
formation System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1056-5.
13  Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017 . Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management In-
formation System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1056-5.
14  Aiyar, Y., Bhattacharya, S. (2016). The Post Office Paradox, A Case Study of the Block Level Education Bureaucracy. Economic & 
Political Weekly, Vol. 11, No. 11.
15  Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017 . Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management In-
formation System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1056-5.
16  World Bank (2017). Program Appraisal Document on a Proposed IDA Grant and Multi-Donor Trust Fund Grant to the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the General Education Quality Improvement Program for Equity (GEQIP-E).
17  For full information on the World Bank’s SABER program, including methods and terminology please see: http://saber.world-
bank.org/index.cfm15
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEAS18  Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017 . Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management In-
formation System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1056-5.
19  Asim, S., Chimombo, J., Chugunov, D., Gera, R., 2017 . Moving Teachers to Malawi’s Remote Communities A Data-Driven Ap-
proach to Teacher Deployment. Policy Research Working Paper 8253, Washington DC: World Bank.
20  Custer, S. Sethi, T. (Eds.), 2017 . Avoiding Data Graveyards: Insights from Data Producers and Users in Three Countries. Wil-
liamsburg, VA: AidData at the College of William & Mary.
21  Figlio, David N.; Karbownik, Krzysztof; Salvanes, Kjell G. (2015). Education Research and Administrative Data, IZA Discussion 
Papers, No. 9474, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn
22  OECD (2017), Development Co-operation Report 2017: Data for Development, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
dcr-2017-en
23  Open Data Watch (2015). Navigating the politics of open data: A High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) Side Event. Outcome Docu-
ment.
24  United Nations Joint Inspection Unit (2016). Evaluation of the contribution of the United Nations development system to 
strengthening national capacities for statistical analysis and data collection to support the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. A/71/431, JIU/REP/2016/5
25  Demombynes, G., Sandefur, J., 2014. Costing a Data Revolution, Data for Development Perspective Paper, Copenhagen Con-
sensus Center.
26  United Nations Joint Inspection Unit (2016). Evaluation of the contribution of the United Nations development system to 
strengthening national capacities for statistical analysis and data collection to support the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. A/71/431, JIU/REP/2016/5
27  Lucas, Adrienne M., and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2012. “ Access, Sorting, and Achievement: The Short-Run Effects of Free Primary Edu-
cation in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (4): 226–53.
28  Figlio, David N.; Karbownik, Krzysztof; Salvanes, Kjell G. (2015). Education Research and Administrative Data, IZA Discussion 
Papers, No. 9474, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn
29  Brookings information for accountability. READ https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/global_20170125_in-
formation_for_accountability.pdf
30  Figlio, D., Karbownik, K., Salvanes, K., 2016. Education Research and Administrative Data, in Hanushek E., Machin, S., Woess-
mann, L. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 5.
31  This table lists studies which make use of administrative data and were published between January 1990 and July 2014 in the 
following outlets: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, American 
Economic Review, Econometrica, Economic Journal, Economics of Education Review, Education Finance and Policy, Journal of 
Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Public Economics, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, Review of Economic Studies, Review of Economics and Statistics and NBER Working Papers: Education Program.
32  Nunn, N., 2019. Rethinking Economic Development, Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 52, Issue 4, pp. 1349–1373.
33  Pritchett, L., Sandefur, J., 2014. Context Matters for Size: Why External Validity Claims and Development Practice do not Mix, 
Journal of Globalization and Development, De Gruyter, vol. 4(2), 161–197 .
34  Porteous, O., 2020. Research Deserts and Oases: Evidence from 27 Thousand Economics Journal Articles on Africa.
35  Das, J., Do, Q.T., Shaines, K., Srikant, S., 2013. US and them: the geography of academic research. J. Dev. Econ. 105, 112–130.
36  Porteous, O., 2020. Research Deserts and Oases: Evidence from 27 Thousand Economics Journal Articles on Africa.16
CHANGING HOW EDUCATION DATA ARE USED TO GENERATE IDEAS37  Emiliana V egas: 5 lessons from recent educational reforms in Chile, Brookings: https://www.brookings.edu/research/5-les-
sons-from-recent-educational-reforms-in-chile/
38
  Mizala, A
., Schneider, B., 2019. Promoting quality education in Chile: the politics of reforming teacher careers, Journal of Ed-
ucation Policy, DOI: 10.1080/02680939.2019.1585577
39
  See database intro
duced in Table 1.
40
  H
onig, D., Pritchett, L. (2019). The Limits of Accounting-Based Accountability in Education (and Far Beyond): Why More Ac-
counting Will Rarely Solve Accountability Problems, CGD Working Paper 510.
41
  Ro
ed, K., Raaum, O., 2003. Administrative Registers: Unexplored Reservoirs of Scientific Knowledge? Econ. J. 113 (488), F258–
F281.
42
  
Card, David, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. Expanding access to administrative data for research in 
the United States. Washington, DC: National Science Foun- dation White Paper No. 10–069.
43
  Eina
v, L., Levin, J., 2014. The Data Revolution and Economic Analysis, Innovation Policy and the Economy, 14, issue 1, p. 1–24.
44
  
Figlio et al. (2017). The Promise of Administrative Data in Education Research. Presidential Essay, Association for Education 
Finance and Policy.
45
  Custer
, S., King, E., Atinc, T., Read, L., Sethi, T., 2018. Toward Data-Driven Education Systems: More Data and More Evidence 
Use, Journal of International Cooperation in Education, Vol.20–2/21–2 (2018) pp. 5–34
46
  Assaitou Bah, Department of Science, T
echnology and Innovation, Sierra Leone, direct communication.
47
  Kireg
yera (2013). The emerging data revolution in Africa: Strengthening the statistics, policy and decision-making chain. Sun 
Press.
48
  Crouch, L., 2019. M
eeting the Data Challenge in Education, A Knowledge and Innovation Exchange (KIX) Discussion Paper. 
49
 Washington DC: Global Partnership for Education.
https://esrc.ukri.org/news-events-and-publications/news/news-items/addressing-major-societal-challenges-by-harness-
ing-government-data/
50
  T
aylor, M. (2016). The Political Economy of Statistical Capacity, A Theoretical Approach. Discussion Paper No. IDB-DP-471, In-
ter-American Development Bank.
51
  T
aylor, M. (2016). The Political Economy of Statistical Capacity, A Theoretical Approach. Discussion Paper No. IDB-DP-471, In-
ter-American Development Bank.
52
  T
aylor, M. (2016). The Political Economy of Statistical Capacity, A Theoretical Approach. Discussion Paper No. IDB-DP-471, In-
ter-American Development Bank.
53
  Stephen T
aylor, Department of Basic Education, South Africa, direct communication.
54
  
Figlio et al. (2017). The Promise of Administrative Data in Education Research. Presidential Essay, Association for Education 
Finance and Policy.
55
  Op
en Data Watch (2019). Navigating the politics of open data: A High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) Side Event.
56
  U
nited Nations Economic Commission for Europe (2008). How Should a Modern National System of Official Statistics Look? 
UNECE, Statistical Division.
57
  U
nited Nations Economic Commission for Europe (2008). How Should a Modern National System of Official Statistics Look? 
UNECE, Statistical Division.WWW.CGDEV.ORG
This work is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons  
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license.Ideas to Action: Independent 
research for global prosperity
JACK ROSSITER is a senior policy analyst at 
the Center for Global Development58  NSOs are also respected for maintaining stable statistical concepts—which can be crucial for policy applications.
59  Duflo, E. 2017 . The Economist as Plumber. Essay based on the Ely lecture, AEA meeting 2017 .
60  Punton, M., 2016. How Can Capacity Development Promote Evidence-Informed Policy Making, Literature Review for the 
Building Capacity to Use Research Evidence (BCURE) Programme. ITAD.
61  Crouch, L., 2019. Meeting the Data Challenge in Education, A Knowledge and Innovation Exchange (KIX) Discussion Paper. 
Washington DC: Global Partnership for Education.
62  Creating a Culture of Evidence Use: Lessons from J-PAL’s Government Partnerships in Latin America (2018). https://www.pov-
ertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/documents/creating-a-culture-of-evidence-use-lessons-from-jpal-govt-partnerships-in-
latin-america_english.pdf
63  Currie, J., Kleven, H., Zwiers, E. (2019) Technology and Big Data Are Changing Economics: Mining Text to Track Methods. Pre-
pared for AEA/ASSA Session: Empirical Practice in Economics: Challenges and Opportunities.
64  Das, J., Do, Q.T., Shaines, K., Srikant, S., 2013. US and them: the geography of academic research. J. Dev. Econ. 105, 112–130.
65  Figlio, D., Karbownik, K., Salvanes, K., 2016. Education Research and Administrative Data, in Hanushek E., Machin, S., Woess-
mann, L. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 5.
66  Singh, A., via Opening up Microdata Access in Africa, http://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/opening-up-microda-
ta-access-in-africa
67  Figlio, David N.; Karbownik, Krzysztof; Salvanes, Kjell G. (2015). Education Research and Administrative Data, IZA Discussion 
Papers, No. 9474, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn