Article
Management of digital records in
selected financial services parastatals
in Zimbabwe
Alfred Chikomba
National Archives of Zimbabwe
Antonio Rodrigues
University of South Africa
Mpho Ngoepe
University of South Africa
Abstract
In recent years, there has been a surge of information and communication technologies (ICTs) in the conduct
of business. Public sector institutions in Zimbabwe have also embraced ICTs with an objective of promoting
accountability, transparency and service delivery. This has increased the generation of digital records which are
key in day-to-day business activities. However, the management of such records has been a challenge for most
public sector institutions in most countries including Zimbabwe. Despite embracing ICTs, there have not been
many changes to create a favourable environment for managing the resultant digital records. The findings
reported in this research article were part of a broader study on the management of digital records in selected
financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe. The study utilised the digital curation centre (DCC) curation
lifecycle model as the theoretical framework of the study. This multiple case study research adopted a
qualitative research approach to collect data from four purposively selected financial services parastatals in
Zimbabwe using interviews, document analysis and observation as data collection tools. The study established
that the financial services parastatals under investigation still lack requisite tools such as policies, guidelines and
standards, adequate infrastructure and skilled manpower for effective and efficient management of digital
records. In addition, the National Archives of Zimbabwe (NAZ), which has the legal mandate of regulating
records management, has not been sufficiently involved in the management of digital records due to the lack of
a legal and professional framework. Therefore, the study recommends the crafting of in-house policies and
guidelines for managing digital records, procurement of adequate infrastructure and the recruitment of skilled
and experienced manpower, if an enabling environment for the effective and efficient management of digital
records is to be created.
Keywords
Digital records, digital records management, informat ion communication technologies, financial services
parastatals, Zimbabwe.
Submitted: 17 May, 2019; Accepted: 26 January, 2019.
Introduction
In recent years there has been a global rise in the use
of information communication technologies (ICTs) in
the day to day conduct of business by both the public
and private sectors. Most governments, including theCorresponding author:
Antonio Rodrigues, Department of Information Science,
University of South Africa.
Email: TRodriqu@unisa.ac.zaInformation Development
1–13
ªThe Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0266666920906858
journals.sagepub.com/home/idv
Zimbabwean government, are moving towards using
ICTs to promote accountability, transparency and
improve service delivery. The embracing of ICTs in
the conduct of official business has increased the gen-
eration of digital records. For instance, most govern-
ment agencies are now using electronic mail (e-mail)
replacing the traditional way of correspondence, and
word processing documents. Thus, the advent of ICTs
has transformed ways in which records are created, used
and stored. Moreover, Ngoepe and Keakopa (2011)
stress that the advent of digital records has presented
further challenges to the management of records.
For quite a long time many organisations in devel-
oping countries have largely operated in a paper-
based environment. Desp ite facing difficulties in
managing records in paper format, organisations
embraced ICTs which increased the generation and
use of digital records. This has presented additional
challenges to the manage ment of records (Lemiux
2016; Ngoepe and Keakopa 2011). Studies by Ambira
(2016); Asogwa (2012); Matangira (2016) and Mut-
sagondo (2017) all bemoan the environment in which
digital records are being managed in different public
sector institutions. In most cases, as governments are
putting effort into embracing ICTs through
e-government, the same cannot be said with regards
to creating a favourable environment for managing
the resultant records. Some of the challenges that have
compromised the integrity, reliability, authenticity
and usability of digital records include non-
existence of or non-adherence to records management
standards, lack of adequate and proper infrastructure
and skilled manpower.
It is therefore imperative that organisations put in
place mechanisms that will strengthen their digital
records management environment since they play an
important role in supporting daily business activities
(Abuzawaydah, Yusof and Aziz 2013; International
Records Management Trust (IRMT) 2009). This
study used the Digital Curation Centre (DCC) life-
cycle model to assess the management of digital
records in selected financial services parastatals in
Zimbabwe with a view to coming up with recommen-
dations that may enhance their effective management.
Background to the study
The use of ICTs in Zimbabwe dates back to 1972 with
the establishment of the Central Computing Services
(CCS) which aimed at providing ICT services to the
public service (Nengomasha 2012). During that time,CCS was under the Ministry of Finance and the use of
ICTs was still at its infancy. Over the years there have
been notable developments in embracing ICTs. For
instance, in 2005 the first ICT policy was crafted to
provide the framework that would increase the use of
ICTs in the country. The policy had as an objective
spearheading social change by reducing the social gap
between ‘the haves and the have nots’. Again, in the
same year, the Integrated Results-Based Management
(IRBM) System was adopted (Nkala, Ngulube and
Mangena 2012). The system is a tool used by the gov-
ernment to reform and modernise the public sector as it
provides a framework for planning, implementing,
monitoring and reporting on organisational perfor-
mance and linking organisational performance to per-
sonnel performance (Zimbabwe Government 2016).
As both public and private institutions continued to
embrace ICTs, a stand-alone Ministry of ICT was
established in 2009 with a mandate to promote tech-
nology usage especially in the public sector. This was
followed by the launching of an e-government strat-
egy in 2011 which aimed at improving service deliv-
ery and bringing the government closer to citizens. As
such, various e-government projects were introduced.
These include the Public Finance Management Sys-
tems (PFMS), a system used to process financial
transactions within the government, and also the Zim-
babwe Integrated Performance Management Solution
(ZIPMAS), a system used for reporting, evaluating
and processing staff appraisals in addition to financial
transactions (Nkala, Ngulube and Mangena 2012). In
addition, some of the factors that promoted ICT usage
include the liberalisation of the telecommunications,
the postal and courier services sector; the establish-
ment of regulatory bodies in ICT; establishment of the
Cabinet Committee on Scientific Research, Technol-
ogy Development and Applications; and computerisa-
tion of government ministries in the main centres of the
country (Zimbabwe National Policy for ICT 2015).
However, as the government was embracing ICTs
through the mentioned initiatives, little or nothing was
done to create an enabling environment to effectively
and efficiently manage the resultant digital records.
This means that the same environment in which paper
records were managed did not change with the advent
of ICTs. According to Nkala, Ngulube and Mangena
(2012), the intended benefits of e-government will be
compromised unless there is a conducive environment
for managing records that will be created. Luyomba
(2010) opines that increased usage of ICTs to conduct
business and transmit information contributes to the2 Information Development XX(X)need to manage the resultant records. Thus, there is a
need to create a conducive environment for the man-
agement of digital records. This can be achieved by
putting in place mechanisms like policies and legisla-
tions, adequate infrastructure and skilled manpower,
as they provide the framework in which digital
records are to be managed (Keakopa 2007; Nengoma-
sha 2009; Ngulube and Tafor 2006). In addition, Zim-
babwe’s national archival institution should play a
pivotal role in ensuring that a conducive environment
for the management of digital records should be cre-
ated (International Council on Archives (ICA) 2005;
Nkala, Ngulube and Mangena 2012).
A study by Matangira (2016) on the management
of records in Zimbabwe’s public service revealed that
since the adoption of e-government, a national policy
to manage digital records was yet to be formulated.
This is despite the fact that various documents that
emphasise the need for harnessing ICTs have been
crafted. It is this background that influenced the current
study. This study sought to assess how digital records
are being managed in selected financial services para-
statals in Zimbabwe in the absence of strong national
policy. In support of e-government initiatives, various
business systems have been adopted. Thus, govern-
ment agencies need to respond to these changes so that
records may be managed in an efficient and effective
manner. The study assessed the efforts that have been
made to create a records management environment that
matches these developments. Special focus was on pol-
icies and guidelines, standards, skills, infrastructure
and the involvement of the National Archives of Zim-
babwe (NAZ), which are critical aspects in the man-
agement of digital records.
Statement of the problem
Although there has been considerable growth in pro-
moting the use of ICTs in parastatals, the same cannot
be said with regards to creating a conducive environ-
ment for the management of the resultant digital
records. Despite the fact that there has been an
increase in the generation of digital records in Zim-
babwe, the same environment in which organisations
managed paper records still exists (Chaterera 2013;
Matangira 2016; Mutsagondo 2017). These same
authors indicate that there have not been many
changes to records management in the public sector
in Zimbabwe since the adoption of e-government. For
example, no legislative and policy changes regarding
records management have been effected. Quite anumber of authors have agreed that ICTs contribute
to the increase in the generation of digital records and
as such, organisations need to put in place mechan-
isms to ensure that such records are properly managed
(Keakopa 2007; Luyombya 2010; Moloi 2007; Nen-
gomasha 2009; Wamukoya and Mutula 2005).
Asogwa (2012) mentions that unlike paper records,
the management of digital records has witnessed addi-
tional challenges such as absence of digital records
management policies and guidelines, standards,
proper and adequate infrastructure, technological
obsolescence, and skilled personnel. Failure to over-
come such challenges compromises the management
of these records which are critical for the day to day
administration of any org anisation. According to
IRMT (2009), well managed records are a foundation
for good governance as they provide trusted and accu-
rate information to support decision making and
accountability. Keorapetse and Keakopa (2012)
reiterate that records play an important role in fighting
corruption; protecting citizens’ rights, ensuring trans-
parency, accoun tability and good governance. As
such, government agencies should prioritise the man-
agement of records despite their format, to curb reper-
cussions of financial irregularities.
Purpose and research objectives of the
study
The purpose of this study was to assess the manage-
ment of digital records in selected financial services
parastatals in Zimbabwe with the aim of coming up
with recommendations that may enhance their effec-
tive management. The specific objectives of the study
were to:
/C15Examine the current state of digital records
management in Zimbabwe’s financial services
parastatals.
/C15Assess the infrastructure and resources for the
management of digital records in the financial
services parastatals in Zimbabwe.
/C15Assess the level of skills possessed by person-
nel managing digital re cords in Zimbabwe’s
financial services parastatals.
/C15Ascertain the extent to which NAZ is involved
in the management of digital records in finan-
cial services parastatals.
/C15Make recommendations for the management of
digital records in Zimbabwe’s financial ser-
vices parastatals.Chikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 3Research methodology
Research methodologies range from qualitative
(reporting observations in natural language with less
use of numbers) to quantitative (assigning numbers
to observations). To achieve its aim and to find the
answer to the research problem for this study, this
study used a qualitative re search approach. The need
to explore the attitudes and opinions of those indi-
viduals involved in the management of digital
records at the parastatals, and to arrive at some
understanding of the factors determining those per-
spectives, led to the adoption of a qualitative
approach. The appropriateness of a qualitative
approach for this study wa sa l s od i r e c t e db yt h ef a c t
that the research problem to be studied is a phenom-
enon that cannot be quantified since it is complex
and social in nature (Mason 2002:1).
In addition, qualitative research is also suitable for
populations that have been barely researched (Curry,
Nembhard and Bradley 2009). Most public sector
studies on either paper or digital records management,
especially in Zimbabwe, have been conducted in gov-
ernment ministries and departments, and, to a limited
extent, local authorities. The current study sought to
investigate the management of digital records in
financial services parastatals which have been barely
researched, thus, a qualitative approach was consid-
ered to be suitable.
It is also worth noting that, although the researcher
trusted that certain findings of this study were appli-
cable to other organisations, it is important to high-
light at this point the observation by Stevens, Flinn
and Shepherd (2010) on qualitative research. These
authors argue that often the critique of qualitative
research derives from the false assumption that the
purpose of research is to generate findings that are
applicable to all different populations in every possi-
ble setting. “In reality, qualitative research is rarely so
bold in its ambitions. It rather more often intends to
generate findings that ar e not so much ‘generalisa-
ble’ as ‘transferrable’ as exploratory tools in new
settings” (Stevens, Flinn and Shepherd, 2010:62).
In addition, despite the fac t that this study followed
a qualitative approach, in other words, observations
that yield data that are not easily reduced to numbers,
it did sometimes quantify some of the results, when
appropriate or relevant. However, while the qualita-
tive approach used was appropriate to this study, it
did not adequately bolster the limited quantitative
data discussed in the findings.A multi case study rese arch design was also
employed in this study. This was because evidence
from a multiple-case study is often considered more
compelling, and the overall study is therefore
regarded as being more robust (Yin 2009:53). Data
were collected from four financial services parastatals
in Zimbabwe. A list of such parastatals was extracted
from the Government of Zimbabwe online website
(2016). The website had listed 13 parastatals under
the financial services sector but permission was only
granted in four parastatals. The four investigated
financial services parastatals are the National Social
Security Authority (NSSA), State Enterprises
Restructuring Agency (SERA), Zimbabwe Invest-
ment Authority (ZIA) and the Zimbabwe Revenue
Authority (ZIMRA). Data were also collected
through face to face interviews, document review
and observation to enhance the trustworthiness of
the findings.
Purposive sampling is one of numerous ways a
researcher may use to select participants in a study.
It helps to identify participants who might have direct
impact or immediate information regarding the sub-
ject under investigation. Therefore, participants in this
study were purposively selected because of their
experience in the management of records and infor-
mation in their respective institutions. The partici-
pants included records and information technology
(IT) personnel from selected financial services para-
statals as well as archivists from NAZ. One of the
financial services parastatals did not have records per-
sonnel thus two accounts personnel were selected to
provide data on records management. Data from inter-
view transcripts, observation checklist and document
review were organised in accordance with the themes
under investigation in the study.
Discussion of findings
This section provides a presentation and discussion of
findings of the study. The discussion is divided
according to the research objectives of the study.
State of DRM in financial services parastatals in
Zimbabwe
The first objective of the study sought to assess the
state of digital records management. In this regard, the
study sought to have a full understanding of how digi-
tal records management issues were being addressed.
Thus, a number of issues were investigated.4 Information Development XX(X)Records management unit in financial services parastatals.
The purpose of this objective was to establish if finan-
cial services parastatals had a dedicated unit whose
sole responsibility was to properly manage both paper
and digital records. Organisations should ensure that
records are properly managed so that they serve the
purpose for which they were created. This can be done
by establishing or putting in place a unit whose sole
responsibility is to ensure that a conducive environ-
ment for records management is created. This unit
should ensure that records in whatever format are
effectively and efficiently managed in a systematic
manner throughout their lifecycle (Chaterera 2013).
In most cases, the role of this unit is to control the
movement and storage of records in organisations.
The study established that despite the existence of a
registry, at times some officers were not making use
of it. This meant that the existence of the registry was
often in theory only to some officers. Similar results
were also obtained by Nengomasha (2009) who found
that records management procedures which included
the use of registry were flouted and not followed in
Namibia’s public sector. Therefore, records manage-
ment officers had no control over some records. The
situation has been aggravated by the adoption of
ICTs. The adoption of ICTs has increased the gener-
ation of digital records and the records management
unit/registry was slowly losing control over the man-
agement of records in the organisations. This was
because some officers would receive mails directly
in their personal accounts and registry personnel
would not be accountable for such communications.
In addition, it was observed that the functions of
the registry indicate that records personnel were still
confined to managing traditional records and were not
involved in the management of digital records. During
a visit to one of the parastatals, one of the participants
mentioned that “the IT department has full mandate of
managing records in electronic format. As records
officers, we have minimum control over electronic
records”. Thus, although most parastatals had a
records management unit, their roles remained mainly
for those records in paper format whereas digital
records were managed by the IT section. This means
that, in practice, organisations have often not yet
accepted that records management has evolved from
mainly paper based to digital. According to Johare
(2006), digital records management now involves two
professions, that is, records management and IT
which are different with regards to policy positions
and ethics. These two have been treated as opposingrather than complementary professions. Therefore,
the registry should involve key players in recordkeep-
ing such as records managers, archivist and IT per-
sonnel under a shared responsibility to establish
credible digital records management programmes
(Johare 2006).
Types of records created or captured. Financial services
parastatals in Zimbabwe have embraced ICTs for the
conduct of business. In addition, various services are
now being offered online. Therefore, the study inves-
tigated the types of digital records created or captured
by the said parastatals in Zimbabwe. The study
revealed that a number and a variety of digital records
were created or captured. Similar results were also
established by Chaterera (2013), Matangira (2016)
and Mutsagondo (2017) who highlighted that the use
of ICTs as a result of the adoption of e-government by
the government of Zimbabwe has seen an increase in
the creation or capture of digital records in the public
sector in Zimbabwe.
The study found that quite a number of digital
records were being created or captured by financial
services parastatals in Zimbabwe. These parastatals
are increasingly using ICTs as a crucial component
of business operations. As a result, information is
often in electronic form. Various business processes
and systems that have been adopted, such as office
automation systems, electronic e-mailing systems and
management information systems have contributed to
the increase in the creation of digital records. Most of
these digital records were, however, not regarded as
official records as “hard copies” were still preferred as
the official way of internal and external communica-
tions. The fact that e-mails were printed and filed also
showed that digital records were not regarded as offi-
cial records. In addition, some e-mails were not even
printed which might make it difficult to hold other
officers accountable for their actions. During the vis-
its to these paratstatals it was observed that a consid-
erable number of paper records are still being created
or captured by parastatals in Zimbabwe. Although
ICTs have been embraced, paper records still played
a key role in their organisations. Ironically, ICT facil-
ities have also increased the generation of paper
records.
Policies and legal framework. According to Mutsagondo
(2017), the absence of a digital records management
policies and guidelines undermines an organisation’s
attempts in managing digital records effectively.TheChikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 5DCC lifecycle model also emphasises the need for a
legal framework and policies in managing digital
records. The model encourages organisations to plan
for all activities as this will improve the quality of
digital records management. Policies and guidelines
are key components in any records management pro-
gramme. As such, organisations are recommended to
formulate such documents to ensure that people are
guided in executing their records management duties
as well as setting the parameters which organisations
should be confined to. This means that proper records
management starts with the establishment of policies
and guidelines that will control records throughout
their lifecycle.
Zimbabwe does not have a national digital records
management policy and therefore it is critical for pub-
lic sector organisations to craft in-house policies and
guidelines. However, this study revealed that the
financial services under investigation did not have
in-house policies and guidelines for managing digital
records. When asked whether there were in-house
policies or guidelines for managing records, partici-
pants gave varying responses. The following are
selected verbatim comments made by records person-
nel in their respective parastatals:
We have some guidelines that guide us in doing records
management work in this organisation. With regards to
digital records, I am not sure because, as a section we do
not have much control over such records as this is
mainly done by the IT section.
What we have here are instructions that are shared on
SharePoint. With these we are guided as to how we
should manage our records.
We have procedures manual we use as guidelines for
managing records. Basically they inform us on handling
incoming and outgoing paper mail.
The above comments indicate that in most cases,
digital records were created, used, maintained and
disposed of without guidelines. This meant that digital
records were managed on an ad hoc basis. Similar
findings were also identifie d in different countries
especially in Botswana, Kenya and Namibia (Ambira
2016; Keakopa 2007; Nengomasha 2009). According
to Mutsagondo (2017), the absence of a digital
records management policy in the public departments
in the Midlands Province in Zimbabwe meant that
public officers were incapacitated in managing digital
records professionally and efficiently. This was also
true for financial services parastatals. Both recordsand IT personnel were not fully equipped to manage
digital records as they were not aware of their orga-
nisations’ position on the management of digital
records.
This was different for paper records since guide-
lines in the form of procedures manual and instruc-
tions directing personnel on how the records were
supposed to be managed were in place. Failure by
organisations to put in place necessary digital records
management policies and guidelines was an indica-
tion of a lack of commitment to create an enabling
environment for the effective management of these
records. Results of the findings of this research con-
firmed that, although ICTs have been embraced
through e-government, there has not been much effort
to put in place measures that would control, supervise
or direct the management of the resultant records. E-
mails and social media records were created, used and
disposed of in the absence of guidelines. Thus, finan-
cial services parastatals in Zimbabwe were yet to for-
mulate guidelines that would exhibit their
commitment in relation to the management of digital
records. Absence of policies showed that the approach
to digital records management is mainly informal or
rather unwritten. These findings show that the man-
agement of digital records in the financial services in
Zimbabwe is being done without any form of
guidelines.
The study also conducted an investigation to estab-
lish whether personnel entrusted with the manage-
ment of digital records were aware of the national
legal framework in which the management of records
should be conducted. In records and information man-
agement, legislation provides a framework for how a
record is supposed to be managed throughout its life-
cycle. Although there are other laws that govern the
management of different records in Zimbabwe, the
researcher focused mainly on the NAZ Act of 1986.
The findings of this study revealed that, most par-
ticipants were not aware of the NAZ Act but were
aware of the requirements of laws that govern the
operations of their organisations. The researcher
acknowledges that, although a number of authors such
as Mutsagondo and Chaterera (2014) have argued that
the NAZ Act has been overtaken by technology and
should not be used for managing digital records, the
Act provides the basis for managing records in gen-
eral, as reckoned by Matangira (2016).
Standards for managing digital records. The DCC life-
cycle stipulates that digital records management6 Information Development XX(X)activities should adhere to set standards. Standards are
essential as they provide a framework in which orga-
nisations may benchmark their activities. The study
reviewed that no financial services parastatal in Zim-
babwe had adopted any records management related
standards. These findings are similar to those of a
study conducted by Ambira (2016) in Kenya. The
author revealed that there was no single ministry in
Kenya that had adopted any form of standard for the
management of digital records (Ambira, 2016:281).
Failure to comply with set standards may compromise
the quality in which records are created, used, main-
tained and disposed. One of the reasons for not adher-
ing to the standards was a lack of knowledge.
Participants were not aware of the standards that may
be used in records management. The fact that the
management of digital records was most often
assigned to IT personnel may also have contributed
to this scenario. IT personnel often were not familiar
with the management of digital records as this was not
their area of expertise.
Top management support. According to Ngulube and
Kemoni (2008), lack of senior management’s support
contributes to the bad state of records. Ngoepe and
Van der Walt (2009) mention that senior officials tend
not to recognise the need for effective records man-
agement as well as the importance of records as evi-
dence of the organisation’s activities. This is
supported by the findings of a study by Matangira
(2016) which established that the lack of top manage-
ment support in Zimbabwe’s public service jeopar-
dised the management of records as it was accorded
a low profile. A study by Mutsagondo (2017) in the
public sector in the Midlands Province of Zimbabwe
also established that lack of top management support
was evidenced by the lack of a budget for records
management activities while other sections such as
Finance and Human Resources (HR) had their own
budgets. The author further mentions that there were
also inadequate and unqualified staff in registries,
lack of workshops and modern ICT infrastructure.
The same situation was also identified in this study.
Although participants indicated that senior managers
were working very hard to ensure that requisite
resources and funds for training were availed, their
support towards digital records management is still
questionable. The fact that there were no major
changes with regards to management of records since
the adoption of e-government is a testament to the
lack of top management support. The study also foundthat the procurement of ICT infrastructure by top
management was often for broader e-government
projects, not necessarily for records management.
Storage. The environment in which digital records are
stored has an impact on the lifespan of the record
(Mutsagondo 2017). Therefore, organisations should
ensure that systems used to store digital records are
adequate. In addition, the format and media in which
records are stored should maintain their authenticity,
reliability, integrity and usability. As such, an appro-
priate media and strategy for the storage of digital
records throughout their lifecycle should be selected.
This study revealed that records were stored on
both removable and non-removable devices, and no
parastatal had adopted cloud storage. Only records
that were created and maintained in the business sys-
tems were stored in servers and had offsite back-up
storage. It was also observed during visits to the para-
statals that the area in which some servers were placed
was not conducive for the preservation of digital
records. Storage spaces lacked climate control, fire
extinguishers, etc. The rooms also showed that gen-
eral housekeeping practices were lacking in most of
the parastatals under investigation.
Access and security. The use of passwords to protect
digital records from unauthorised access was popular
in the financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe. This
was also popular in Uganda and Botswana as estab-
lished by Luyomba (2010) and Kalusopa (2011)
respectively. In most cases, access to digital records
had access levels. Not everyone and anyone could
access certain digital records as personnel had differ-
ent access levels. However, no participant gave guar-
antees that the records were completely secured as
they had experienced some cases of records manipu-
lation and theft.
Retention and disposal. For whatever reason a record is
created, there is a useful life of that record, that is, a
period it is useful for the organisation (Howell and
Cogar 2003:2). There is need to retain what is needed
and eliminate what is not. In this case, organisations
should prepare retention periods for digital records
created and/or captured by the organisation. However,
none of the parastatals under investigation had reten-
tion schedules for records in digital format. Absence
of retention schedules meant that organisations might
be losing valuable records and keeping those that have
less value. It is worth noting though that it wasChikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 7observed that for paper records, various types and
classes of records had well defined retention periods.
From the above discussion, it can be clearly seen
that the management of digital records in the financial
services parastatals in Zimbabwe is still in its infancy.
In all the investigated parastatals there was no docu-
mentation to guide digital records management activ-
ities as prescribed by the DCC lifecycle model.
Creation or capture of records was not done in accor-
dance to documented policies and guidelines. The
same was also true for appraisal of digital records in
all the parastatals under investigation. There were no
policies, guidelines or schedules for the evaluation
and selection of digital records needed for both short
and long-term curation and preservation. In addition,
the DCC lifecycle stipulates that digital records need
to be stored adhering to relevant standards. According
to the participants, no parastatal adhered to any stan-
dard(s) in relation to storage of digital records.
Infrastructure and resources for managing digital
records
Asogwa (2012:205) indicates that for a digital
records management programme to be successful it
should be supported by the availability of proper,
relevant and sufficient infrastructure and resources.
Moloi and Mutula (2007:291) also established that
the management of digital records is often hampered
because of a lack of infrastructure, such as adequate
power supply, reliable telecommunication systems,
computers, and so on.
Matangira (2016) revealed that government minis-
tries in Zimbabwe had not properly invested in ade-
quate infrastructure and ICTs to advance digital
records management. Conversely, this study revealed
that there is a rise in the procurement of IT infrastruc-
ture which is essential for digital records manage-
ment. With regards to the availability of proper and
adequate infrastructure and resources, IT officers in
various parastatals mentioned that these are being
availed. However, the procurement of the ICT tools
was for overall development of e-government projects
and not necessarily for records management. This can
be explained by the lack of systems for managing
digital records. No organisation had a system dedi-
cated for records management. Business systems such
as PFMS and SAP have been implemented in most
public sector institutions including financial services
parastatals in Zimbabwe, but no single system for
digital records management had been installed. Thisis an indication that the procurement of IT infrastruc-
ture had more to do with improving service delivery
and accountability and less to do with advancing digi-
tal records management.
Furthermore, it was observed that some registries
did not even have a single computer and operated
completely in a manual system. Again, none of the
parastatals under investigation had a separate budget
for digital records management activities. All these
are an indication that the development of digital
records management still has a long way to go.
Skills and training
Wamukoya and Mutula (2005:71) argue that effective
e-records management has the potential to improve
service delivery and enhance accountability in gov-
ernment, but only if requisite skills needs are met.
These skills are at various levels including creation,
classification, appraisal, disposal as well as the pre-
servation of digital records. Lack of qualified and
experienced personnel has been cited as one of the
challenges faced by organisations in managing
records. The findings of this study revealed that most
parastatals under investigation were now recruiting
personnel with a records management qualification.
However, the capabilities with regards to managing
digital records were ques tionable. It was observed
while interacting with the participants that some did
not even know basic terms in digital records manage-
ment. This was despite the fact that records personnel
possessed records management qualifications. Simi-
larly, Amira (2016) found that the professional and
technical capabilities on managing electronic records
for records personnel in Kenya were inadequate as
professional knowledge on electronic records and
technical skills on management of electronic records
on issues like metadata and electronic records man-
agement systems were poor. The same was also true
for records personnel in the financial services para-
statals in Zimbabwe.
Although the literature reviewed showed that orga-
nisations employ unqualified personnel, there was a
reasonable change in the financial services parastatals
in Zimbabwe. Previous studies have bemoaned short-
age of professionally qualified personnel with regards
to records management. The present study however
revealed that there has been a change in terms of the
recruitment of records personnel in government agen-
cies. However, the personnel with records manage-
ment qualifications were not entrusted with the8 Information Development XX(X)overall duties of managing digital records. This is
probably because human resources see records man-
agement as only confined to paper records and not
digital records. The fact that records personnel were
not fully involved in the management of digital
records may also indicate that senior managers did
not have confidence in records personnel and may
be unsure if they are capable of managing digital
records. In addition, IT personnel, who were entrusted
with the responsibilities of managing the digital
records, were most often not equipped with records
management skills.
The study also revealed that inductions and train-
ings were conducted. However, they did not address
digital records management issues. Most of these
inductions and trainings focused more on the tradi-
tional aspects of paper records management and less
on the management of digital records. Frequency of
trainings was also not commensurate with the fast
evolving digital environment.
In line with the DCC lifecycle, there is need for
collaboration among employees to complement each
other (Higgins 2008). This is important as it improves
the quality of digital records management and may
guarantee long-term access and preservation of
records. However, this was not the case in the para-
statals under investigation. There was no collabora-
tion between records personnel and IT officers, which
negatively impacted on the management of digital
records.
Involvement of NAZ in the management of digital
records
According to Kemoni and Ngulube (2007:121), in
many countries, national archival institutions are
mandated through legislation to ensure proper man-
agement of records in the public sector. In some coun-
tries, this mandate is extended to the private sector.
These institutions advocate for a conducive environ-
ment for effective records management in whatever
format (Barata, Piers and Routledge 2001; Venson,
Ngoepe and Ngulube 2014). The present study sought
to assess the involvement of NAZ in the management
of digital records in financial services parastatals in
Zimbabwe.
Over the years, NAZ has been carrying out records
surveys in the public sector institutions. During these
surveys, NAZ would inspect registries in government
institutions and give recommendations on proper
records management. As revealed by this study, theway surveys have been conducted has not changed
since the adoption of e-government. As such, records
surveys conducted by NAZ focus more on the man-
agement of paper records and less on digital records.
This was observed in the design of the survey work-
sheet used by NAZ for conducting surveys. The work-
sheet only allows NAZ to ask “Do you generate
electronic records”? As such, guidelines on the proper
management of digital records were not provided by
NAZ. In addition, no public sector institution in Zim-
babwe has deposited digital records for preservation
at NAZ. The institution is seen as being unable to
preserve such records as it does not have adequate
infrastructure and resources, such as servers. As men-
tioned by Bhebhe (2015), this indicates that creating
agencies have been left with the task of managing and
preserving their digital records own their own.
On the other hand, it was revealed that NAZ was
slowly trying to get involved in the management of
digital records in Zimbabwe. NAZ had already crafted
the digital transitional framework (DTF) which was
expected to assist public sector institutions in the tran-
sition to the digital environment. A national policy for
the management of digital records was also being
crafted so that public sector institutions will be guided
accordingly in the management of digital records.
Steps to amend the NAZ Act to fully address digital
records management issues are also at an advanced
stage. However, the amendment of the Act has been
delayed as a result of administration changes and this
has derailed the progress of digital records manage-
ment, not only in the financial services parastatals, but
in the public sector in Zimbabwe as a whole. In the
meantime, as noted by Mutsagondo (2017), since
NAZ is not performing an active role in the manage-
ment of digital records in Zimbabwe, organisations
are managing digital records according to the systems
which best suit them and these often do not adhere to
adequate records management standards.
Conclusions and recommendations
The study sought to assess the management of digital
records with a view of coming up with conclusions
and recommendations that would enhance their man-
agement in Zimbabwe’s financial services parastatals.
The findings of the study revealed that all the finan-
cial services parastatals under investigation had
embraced ICTs and this had increased the generation
of digital records. These were mainly created through
various business systems that have been adopted. TheChikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 9participants indicated tha t e-mails constituted the
majority of digital records that were created or cap-
tured in their working env ironment. Other digital
records created included Word/Excel documents,
websites, databases, and social media postings. How-
ever, it was revealed that there were no guidelines or
policies used for effective management of digital
records. Since the adoption of e-government, govern-
ment agencies under investigation have not crafted
guidelines that would help personnel in the manage-
ment of the resultant records. In addition, no parasta-
tal had adopted any standard to manage digital
records. Records management units in the form of
registries were predominantly managing paper
records and the management of digital records was
assigned to the IT personnel. This meant that although
digital records were generated, the responsibilities of
registry personnel did not change much as they were
not involved in the management of the said records.
The study also revealed that parastatals have man-
aged to procure ICT infrastructure and resources
albeit for overall e-government projects. The procure-
ment of IT related resources was mainly for the
advancement of e-government initiatives rather than
the advancement of digital records management per
se. This was also evidenced by the fact that no para-
statal had implemented an EDRMS that would enable
the effective management of digital records.
The findings also showed that, there has been a
shift in terms of recruitment of records personnel in
the public sector in Zimbabwe. Previous studies
bemoaned the lack of skilled manpower to manage
records. The present study revealed that all parastatals
that had a records management unit were now recruit-
ing personnel who had a records management quali-
fication. However, these people were not involved in
the management of digital records as this was done by
IT personnel who had IT qualifications. Most induc-
tions and trainings organised for records personnel
mainly focused on the management of paper records.
On the other hand, IT personnel who were entrusted
with the management of digital records were not
trained in various aspects of records management.
This posed challenges for the management of digital
records.
NAZ has not been very active in relation to the
management of digital records in the public sector
in Zimbabwe. During records surveys, NAZ would
not give much advice with regards to the management
of digital records. Results of this study indicated that
the absence of a national policy has negativelyimpacted on the management of digital records. Para-
statals were in dilemma as to how records were sup-
posed to be managed. This meant that there was no
uniformity in relation to the management of digital
records in Zimbabwe’s financial services parastatals.
Had NAZ been directly involved, challenges sur-
rounding the management of digital records may have
been minimised.
There should be a shift of how a registry should
operate. With changes that have taken place in the
records management field as a result of the advent
of ICTs, organisations should adopt new measures
that would ensure effective management of digital
records. In this regard, records personnel should work
together with IT personnel so that an enabling envi-
ronment for digital records management is created.
Digital records management is not and should not
be the sole responsibility of IT, but a shared respon-
sibility that needs cooperation from both IT and
records personnel.
Financial services parastatals are recommended to
formulate and implement in-house polices and guide-
lines that address digital records management activi-
ties such as creation, use, access, storage and
preservation. In addition, these should adhere to
established records mana gement standards such as
ISO 15489, ISO 23081, ISO 16175, ISO 26122 and
ISO 30300.
Senior managers should also fully support the man-
agement of digital records in their respective organi-
sations. Senior management should advocate for a
favourable environment for effective management
of digital records. This entails that adequate funding
and resource allocation should be provided to advance
records management. There is a need to procure more
resources to advance digital records management.
Since records management is key for any organisation
to function well, it is recommended that there should
be a representative in the top hierarchy of each
organisation.
NAZ is recommended to be heavily involved in the
management of digital records. The same effort they
use for paper records should also be channelled to
digital records. This involves the formulation of
national digital records management policies and
guidelines; inclusion of digital records in their records
surveys and advocating for the amendment of the
NAZ Act. The formulation of a national policy will
give the accepted framework for managing records
within the public sector, thus, encouraging financial
services parastatals and other government agencies to10 Information Development XX(X)come up with in-house policies and guidelines that
would direct their personnel to properly manage digi-
tal records.
Conclusion
The management of digital records in the financial
services parastatals in Zimbabwe is still at a nascent
stage despite the widespread use of ICTs. This is due
to lack or shortage of tools necessary for effective
management of such records. These include policies,
guidelines and standards, senior management support,
dedicated budget, and skilled manpower. Lack of pol-
icies, guidelines and standards have affected records
management practices such as creation, access,
appraisal and storage. In this case, the management
of digital records is done on an ad hoc basis. Since the
usage of ICTs has increased, there is need for records
personnel and IT personnel to collaborate so that a
conducive environment for managing digital records
is created. The NAZ should be actively involved in
the management of digital records so that organisa-
tions will properly manage digital records.
ORCID iD
Antonio Rodrigues https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3064-3
026
Mpho Ngoepe https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6241-161X
References
Abuzawaydah YI, Yusof ZM and Aziz MA (2013) Elec-
tronic records management in institutions of higher
learning in Libya: adoption of dirks model. Journal of
Theoretical and Applied Information Technology 53(3):
346–352.
Ambira CM (2016) A framework for management of elec-
tronic records in support of e-government in Kenya .
PhD thesis, University of South Africa, Pretoria.
Asogwa BE (2012) The challenge of managing electronic
records in developing countries. Records Management
Journal 22(3): 198–211.
Barata K, Piers C and Routledge D (2001) Principles and
practices in managing financ ial records: a reference
model and assessment tool. Available at: www.irmt.org
(Accessed on 13 October 2017).
Bhebhe S (2015) Contemporary diplomatics of the civil
and deceased estate case files found at the National
Archives of Zimbabwe. Records Management Journal
25(1): 107–120.
Chaterera F (2013) Records surveys and the management
of public records in Zimbabwe. Masters dissertation,
University of South Africa, Pretoria.Chinyemba A and Ngulube P (2005) Managing records at
higher education institution: a case study of the Univer-
sity of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg Campus. South
African Journal of Information Management 7(1):1–19.
Curry LA, Nembhard IM and Bradley EH (2009) Qualita-
tive and mixed methods provide unique contributions to
outcomes research. Circulation 119:1442–1452.
Dube T (2011) Archival legislation and the challenge of
managing archives in Zimbabwe. ESARBICA Journal
30:279–290.
Howell Jr and Cogar RN (2003) Records retention - an
essential part of corporate compliance. Record Reten-
tion and Destruction: Current Best Practices . 1(4).
International Council on Archives (ICA) Committee on
Current Records in an Electronic Environment (2005)
Electronic records: a workbook for archivists . Available
at: www.ica.org/biblio/study132Erev.pdf (Accessed on
2 August 2016).
International Records Management Trust (IRMT) (2009)
Training in electronic records management . London:
IRMT.
Johare R (2006) Education and training in electronic
records management (ERM): the need for partnership
building, in Khoo C, Singh D and Chaudry AS (eds.)
Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Conference on Library
and Information education and practise . Singapore. 3-6
April. Singapore school of Communication and Infor-
mation, Nanyang Technological University.
Kalusopa T (2011) Developing an e-records readiness
framework for labour organisations in Botswana . PhD
thesis. University of South Africa: Pretoria.
Katuu S and Ngoepe M (2015) Managing digital records in
a South African public sector institution, in Anderson K,
Duranti L, Jaworski R, Stanic H, Seljan S and Matljan V
(eds) INFuture2015 e-institutions – openness, accessi-
bility, and preservation . Croatia: University of Zagreb.
Keakopa SM (2007) The management of electronic records
in Botswana, Namibia and South Africa . DPhil thesis,
University of London, London.
Keakopa SM (2009) A critical review on the literature on e-
records management in the ESARBICA Region. ESAR-
BICA Journal 28: 78–104.
Keorapetse DL and Keakopa SM (2012) Records manage-
ment as a means to fight corruption & enhancing
accountability in Botswana. ESARBICA Journal 31:
23–35.
Kemoni HN (2007) Records management practices and
public service delivery in Kenya . PhD thesis. University
of KwaZulu-Natal: Pietermaritzburg.
Kemoni HN (2009) Management of electronic records.
Review of empirical studies from the Eastern Southern
Africa Regional Branch of the International Council on
Archives (ESARBICA) region. Records Management
Journal 19(3): 190–203.Chikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 11Kemoni HN and Ngulube P (2007) National Archives and
the effective management of public sector records in
Kenya. Mousaion 25(2):120–140.
Kemoni HN and Ngulube P (2008) Relations between
records management, public service delivery and the
attainment of the United Nation’s millennium develop-
ment goals in Kenya. Information Development 24(4).
296–306.
Lemieux VL (2016) One step forward, two steps back-
wards? Does e-government make governments in devel-
oping countries more transparent and accountable?
Washington (DC): World Bank.
Luyomba D (2010) Framework for effective public digital
records management in Uganda . PhD thesis, University
College London: London
Mason J (2002) Qualitative Researching . 2nd edition. Lon-
don: Sage Publications Ltd.
Matangira V (2016) Records and archives management in
post-colonial Zimbabwe’s public service . PhD thesis,
University of Namibia, Windhoek.
Mnjama NM and Wamukoya J (2007) E-government and
records management: an assessment tool for e-records
readiness in government. The Electronic Library 25(3):
274–284.
Moloi J (2007) E-records readiness in the public sector in
Botswana . Paper presented at the XIX Bi-Annual East
and Southern Africa Regional Branch of the Interna-
tional Council on archives (ESARBICA) General Con-
ference on Empowering Society with Information: The
Role of Archives and records as Tools of Accountabil-
ity, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Moloi J and Mutula S (2007) E-records management in an
e-government setting in Botswana. Information Devel-
opment 23(4):290–306.
Mutiti N (2001) The challenges of managing electronic
records in the ESARBICA region. ESARBICA Journal
20:57–61.
Mutsagondo S (2017) Electronic records management in
public departments in the Midlands Province of Zim-
babwe. Masters dissertation . University of South
Africa: Pretoria.
Mutsagondo S and Chaterera F (2014) Mirroring the
National Archives of Zimbabwe Act in the context of
electronic records: le ssons for ESARBICA member
states. Information Development . Available at: http://
idv.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/06/16/
0266666914538272 (Accessed 29 October 2015).
Nasieku AP, Kemoni H and Otike J (2011) Management of
e-records at Moi University Eldoret, Kenya. ESARBICA
Journal 30: 177–210.
NAZ website. Available at: http://www.archives.gov.zw/
(Accessed on 18 July 2016).
Nengomasha CT (2009) A study of electronic records man-
agement in the Namibian public service in the context of
e-government . PhD thesis, University of Namibia.Nengomasha CT (2012) E-records management and e-
government in Southern Africa. COMMA 1: 97–105
Ngoepe M (2008) An exploration of records management
trends in the South African public sector: A case study
of the department of provincial and local government.
Masters thesis. University of South Africa: Pretoria.
Ngoepe M and Van Der Walt T (2009) An exploration of
records management trends in the South African public
sector. Mousaion 27 (1): 116–136.
Ngoepe M and Van de Walt T (2009) Strategies for the
preservation of e-records in South Africa: Implications
on access to information. Innovation 38:1–27.
Ngoepe M and Keakopa SM (2011) An assessment of the
state of archival and records systems in the ESARBICA
region: a South Africa-Botswana comparison. Records
Management Journal 21(2): 143–160.
Ngulube P and Tafor VF (2006) The management of
public records and archives in the member countries
of ESARBICA. Journal of the Society of Archivists
27(1):57–83
Ngulube P (2007) The nature and accessibility of e-
government in sub-Saharan Africa. International
Review of Information Ethics 7. Available at: http://
www.i-r-ie.net/inhalt/007/16-ngulube.pdf (Accessed 1
November 2014).
Ngulube P (2012) Developing total archives in Zimbabwe:
Seventy-five years of pursuing an elusive ideal, in Ngu-
lube P (ed), National Archives 75@ 30, 75 years of
archiving excellence at the National Archives of Zim-
babwe . Harare: National Archives of Zimbabwe: 21–33.
Nkala GS, Ngulube P and Mangena SB (2012) E-records
readiness at the National Archives of Zimbabwe. Mou-
saion 30(2):94–101.
Okello-Obura C (2011) Utilisation of ICTs by SMEs in
records and information management in Uganda: a base-
line study. SA Archives Journal 1.
Okello-Obura C (2012) Effective records and information
management as a catalyst for fighting corruption. South
African Journal of Information Studies 2: 182–195.
Ruhode EO and Maumbe BM (2008) Arguing for the
enhancement of public service efficiency and effective-
ness through e-Governme nt: the case of Zimbabwe.
IST-Africa Conference Proceedings.
Sejane L (2004) An investigation into the management of
electronic e-records in the public sector in Lesotho. Mas-
ters dissertation. University of KwaZulu-Natal: Durban.
Sigauke DT, Nengomasha CT and Chabikwa S (2015)
Management of email as electronic records in state uni-
versities in Zimbabwe: findings and implications for the
National Archives of Zimbabwe. Paper presented at the
23 rd ESARBICA General Conference, Victoria Falls,
8-12 June.
Stevens M, Flinn A. and Shepherd E (2010. New frame-
works for community engagement in the archive sector:12 Information Development XX(X)from handing over to handing on. International Journal
of Heritage Studies , 16(1-2): 59–76.
Venson SL, Ngoepe M and Ngulube P (2014) The role of
public archives in selected countries in the Eastern and
Southern Africa Regional Branch of the International
Council on Archives region. Innovation 4
Wamukoya J and Mutula SM (2005) Capacity-building
requirements for e-records management: The case in
East and Southern Africa. Records Management Journal
15(2): 71–79 Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Yin RK (2009) Case Study Research. Design and methods.
4th Edition . Applied social research methods series.
London: SAGE.
Zimbabwe (1986) National Archives of Zimbabwe Chapter
25:06 no 8 of 1986 . Harare: Government Printers.
Zimbabwe (2015) National ICT Policy . www.draft-
national-ict-policy-framework.pdf (Accessed 29 Octo-
ber 2015).Zimbabwe Government (2016) Available at: www.zim.
gov.zw/index.php? (Accessed 05 April 2016).
About the authors
Alfred Chikomba works at the National Archives of Zim-
babwe. Contact: Department of Information Science, Uni-
versity of South Africa. Email: alfredchiko@gmail.com
Antonio Rodrigues is a lecturer at the Department of
Information Science, University of South Africa. Email:
TRodriqu@unisa.ac.za https ://orcid.org/0000-0003-3
064-3026
Mpho Ngoepe s a lecturer at the Department of Information
Science, University of South Africa. Email: ngoepms@
unisa.ac.za https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6241-161XChikomba et al: Management of digital records in selected financial services parastatals in Zimbabwe 13