MIRA Channel
Case study by UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy 
Name Location
Year launched
ReachImplementing organizationMIRA Channel
ZMQ DevelopmentIndia, Afghanistan and Uganda
2012
Focus of intervention
Improve maternal and child mortality 
rates through a mobile health-care extension service for women and adolescents with low literacy levels in rural communities850,000 women, children and adolescent girls across three countries
© ZMQ/Hilmi Quraishi
UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World2
Summary
India has the world’s second highest maternal mortality rate (MMR), with 15 per cent of cases 
globally, amounting to 45,000 pregnancy and childbirth-related deaths in 2015 (Graham et al., 
2016). While the country almost achieved the Millennium Development Goals target to reduce 
this number by three-quarters from 1990 to 2015 (WHO, 2015), socio-economic disparities continue to be leading determinants of the drastic within-country variance (UNICEF, n.d.a).
India also has the world’s worst under-5 mortality rate, accounting for one in five cases globally 
(IVAC, 2015). While institutional births and births assisted by a skilled professional have increased 
to almost 80 per cent of all births, rural children still have a 60 per cent higher mortality rate 
than their urban peers (IIPS, 2016). Other major determinants of child mortality across India are 
mothers with low literacy levels and limited schooling, and younger mothers under the age of 20 (NIMS et al., 2012). These groups are typically associated with lower adherence to a full cycle 
of antenatal care (ANC) and post-partum child care (PPC). Despite expanded coverage of health 
services and institutions, many families have little access to comprehensive information about 
the services to promote improved pregnancy and childbirth practices (UNICEF, n.d.b).
MIRA Channel was launched in 2012 as an integrated mobile phone service providing 
communication and information tools for maternal and child health care to rural women in 
low-resource settings. The solution offers app-based modules referred to as ‘Channels’ related to 
a variety of topics, including ANC and PPC, child immunization, family planning and adolescent health. The channels are intended to emulate television programming through audio recordings 
and multimedia content, to improve awareness and build knowledge on health issues, with a 
particular focus on mothers with low levels of literacy.
MIRA Channel has been deployed across hundreds of villages and schools in India, covering 
almost 850,000 women, adolescent girls and children. Some MIRA Channel villages have 
experienced a 50 per cent increase in ANC consultations and institutional deliveries, while immunization rates have increased by over 40 per cent. The solution comprises the MIRA 
Channel App for individual use, the MIRA Channel Worker Toolkit for home visits by community 
health workers (CHWs), and an analytics dashboard called MIRA-PHC Connect for generating reports from MIRA Channel data. This allows service providers to take timely action for reducing 
maternal and child mortality.
Through the UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods 
in a Digital World, this case study is part of a series highlighting how inclusive digital solutions can help people with low skills or low literacy levels use technology in ways that support skills development and, ultimately, improve livelihoods – in contribution to achieving the Sustainable Development Goal on education. For more information go to en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative.ABOUT THIS  
CASE STUDYCase Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development3
Why selected
MIRA Channel was born out of direct experience working with low-literate women 
in a microfinance programme. The women indicated a need for maternal and child health (MCH) information. MIRA Channel is thus user-driven and deeply cognisant of the skills of the women and adolescents it serves. By using games and interactive storytelling, MCH content is made more engaging.
Key takeaways
1 /  MIRA Channel is a comprehensive MCH digital platform for providing vital health 
information to expectant mothers and adolescent women while connecting rural communities in under-resourced settings to health providers.
2 /  The user-friendly interface, which relies on culturally appropriate animations and 
locally adapted audio content, delivers an inclusive digital solution for mothers with low levels of literacy.
3 /  ZMQ has adapted MIRA Channel to multiple country contexts while maintaining 
substantial community stakeholder engagement to ensure contextualized content delivery.UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World4
Context and project origins
Health care in rural India operates as a three-tier 
system: sub-centres feed into primary health centres 
(PHCs) and PHCs feed into community health centres 
(CHCs), each with increasing population coverage capacity. Sub-centres comprise the greatest number of health facilities in the health care system, and act 
as a first point of contact with rural communities. 
A primary role of the rural sub-centres is to provide localized services and information related to MCH, family welfare, nutrition, immunization, and control 
of diarrhoea and communicable diseases. According 
to a report on rural health statistics released by the government in 2015, these sub-centres do not 
sufficiently meet the demands of the populations they 
were designed to serve. The study reveals an average of one female health worker to a rural population of almost 4,000, and one male health worker per 15,000 
people at functioning sub-centres (India, 2015). ZMQ developed MIRA Channel as a strategy to 
offset the shortfall in CHWs across rural India. 
A pilot was launched in Mewat district in the 
state of Haryana in 2012. Mewat is a primarily rural northern district with a female literacy rate of 36 per cent (IIPS, 2016). Fewer than 13 
per cent of women from Mewat have over 
nine years of schooling, while the under-20 fertility rate is 14 per cent, almost double the national average (IIPS, 2016). Mewat also 
has more than double the average maternal 
and infant mortality rates for India as a whole (Manav, 2015). Institutional births account for 
38 per cent of registered cases, while fewer 
than half of all childbirths are assisted by skilled health personnel (IIPS, 2016). 
Figure 1. The rural health care system in India
COMMUNIT Y HEAL TH CENTRE /parenleft.capCHC/parenright.cap
PRIMAR Y HEAL TH CENTRE /parenleft.capPHC/parenright.cap
SUB/hyphen.capCENTRE/ Hospital/Ref erral unit f or four PHCs with specialized ser vices
/ Serves up to 120,000 people
/ Ref eral unit f or six Sub -Centre s
/ Serves up to 30,000 people
/ Peripheral contac t point
   between PHC and CHC
/ Serves up to 5,000 peopleCase Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development5
© ZMQ/Ehsan SahelMothers. The majority of the mothers using 
MIRA Channel had little to no prior experience using 
mobile phones. Therefore, ZMQ reached out to their 
adolescent children or siblings who generally had more experience in using mobile phones to assist in training them to use MIRA Channel. Including 
end-users beyond pregnant mothers laid the 
groundwork for building a programme directed at adolescent girls.
CHWs. Community health workers had more 
experience with mobile phone use. Their common 
exposure involved using feature phones to search 
contact lists and initiate calls, and send messages over SMS. The MIRA Channel programme was first introduced on the types of feature phone 
CHWs were familiar with. When the programme 
migrated to smartphone delivery, CHWs generally experienced little difficulty in using the more advanced keyboard feature of the smartphone 
devices instead of the keypad display of the feature 
phones.In 2016, only 14 per cent of households in India had access to personal computers (ITU, 2016). These devices are most commonly found in internet cafes, 
where they are used for word processing or web 
browsing. The high cost of personal computers is prohibitive for many rural Indians, and their disinclination to obtain computers is compounded 
by the need to be trained and acquire technical 
literacy in order to use them effectively, and the problems caused by an often sporadic power supply.
Despite the low level of access to the internet 
via computer, subscriptions to mobile phone 
services have reached the level of 88 for every 100 inhabitants, with smartphone subscriptions expected to make up 30 per cent of India’s mobile 
coverage and over 90 per cent of its mobile data 
traffic (Ericsson, 2017). These insights led ZMQ to produce a smartphone platform for MIRA Channel 
while keeping the feature phone version largely 
unchanged.Digital skills of MIRA Channel users UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World6
Prior to MIRA Channel, ZMQ and its partners developed a financial 
lending module providing mobile-based solutions to micro-finance 
institutions (MFIs) in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Haryana. The 
objective of this micro-finance programme was to assist the MFIs and their loan officers in collecting and distributing loans. ZMQ discovered that most of the borrowers were women with low literacy levels 
who needed information on MCH. Therefore, ZMQ decided to build 
another module which would provide both loan information and health-care information to expectant and new mothers, as well as child immunization and family planning content. Expectant mothers 
registered the date of their last menstrual period, and received 
information during the subsequent weeks of their pregnancy. The messages came in the form of audio-visual content conveyed through 
icons, graphics and illustrations, embedded with local language 
audio. The child immunization module operated similarly: a woman entered the date of her baby’s birth and received regular alerts about scheduled vaccinations. After adding more MCH content ZMQ 
developed MIRA Channel. ZMQ worked with the MFIs to expand the 
service to other areas served by CHWs across rural India.INSIGHT
 Leveraging 
human networks 
for programme 
expansionMIRA Channel operates as a mobile-based app for MCH using interactive graphics and voice-overs adapted to both feature phones and smartphones. Content is delivered across five sub-
channels: prenatal care, neonatal care, child immunization, adolescent health (for girls) and 
family planning. MIRA Channel uses icons with audio support, making the service an interactive ‘talking toolkit’ designed for women and young people with low literacy skills. MIRA Channel also provides digital content by way of stories and mobile games to adolescent girls on issues 
related to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), menstrual hygiene, and dowries and early child 
marriage.
Figure 2. MIRA’s suite of channel offerings includes (left to right): prenatal care, 
neonatal care, immunization, adolescent health (for girls) and family planning© ZMQ/Hilmi QuraishiCase Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development7
As a part of the content development and user-design 
process, ZMQ staff made almost a dozen field visits 
to Mewat to meet with local stakeholders including 
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations and health ministry representatives. The process included over 300 individual interviews with 
CHWs, auxiliary nurse midwives (ANMs: see below), 
expectant mothers, telecom providers and department officials. During this preliminary fieldwork, ZMQ identified three major challenges: low literacy levels 
among their target group, low female mobile phone 
ownership and poor mobile connectivity.
Environmental challenges
Preliminary field surveys among 381 women revealed that over 70 per cent of respondents reported less 
than eight years of schooling. To address the challenge 
created by the low literacy level and support the female target group, ZMQ developed audio-visual content for MIRA Channel. It uses prominent and 
contextualized icons, and provides weekly audio 
information for expectant mothers with a special focus on nutrition, medication and frequently asked questions.
The country has a relatively high gender gap in mobile 
phone ownership, with 36 per cent more coverage among men than among women (GSMA, 2015). Most women who own mobile phones have basic models 
that do not provide access to the internet or the ability 
to download apps (Figure 4). Therefore, ZMQ created a multi-strategy approach for distributing MIRA Channel content. Women can access it on a shared feature 
phone (Figure 5), or their CHWs can show it on their 
smartphones during their routine house calls. An additional component of the platform uses an online 
portal to connect ANMs and other health workers 
to user or CHW-generated data. The aim is to flag high-risk pregnancies. ANMs are village-level female health workers who are often a woman’s first point of 
contact with government health services. They act as 
supervisors to the CHWs. Designing with the user 
Figure 3. Interface of MIRA Channel India
UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World8
As part of the design approach for the graphics associated with 
each of the messages, ZMQ learned about important cultural 
variations between the implementing countries. For instance, 
bananas in India are longer than bananas in Uganda. When presented with images of both kinds of banana, Ugandan communities preferred the smaller variety that they were used 
to seeing in their own markets. In Afghanistan, local women 
were concerned about how images of husbands appeared in the content. They preferred charming facial features and images of the husband smiling. In Uganda, focus groups revealed that 
stakeholders wanted the CHWs and ANMs to look well dressed, 
with the images showing their headgear and medical equipment. ZMQ learned from these community design sessions to develop 
visual content culturally adapted to each of the implementation 
contexts.LESSON
 
Cultural variations 
in graphic designTo address the connectivity challenge, ZMQ created an offline mode which enables 
CHWs to use the MIRA Channel Toolkit to 
perform their daily maternal and neonatal heath-care activities when they are offline. The data is uploaded as soon as their handset 
re-establishes a connection.
Content development
As part of the visual content design 
process, ZMQ began by testing multiple 
images for each message, with graphics 
contextualized for the region. The images were discussed in focus group sessions along with the intended messaging. During 
the focus groups, the MIRA Channel team 
also invited the community representatives to draw additional icons that they felt best represented the messaging content. ZMQ 
then used the feedback and community 
images to develop a new set of graphics. Individuals from the communities recorded 
the spoken messages associated with the 
graphics so they would preserve the essence of the local dialect.
Figure 4. Type of handset owned by gender in India, 2015
Note: A basic phone has no alphabet keypad, touchscreen, internet access or ability to download apps. Feature phones have at least one of these features, while smartphones have all of these features. Authors’ adaptation from GSMA (2015).
Figure 5. Feature phone versions of MIRA Channel 
(India and Uganda)
Case Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development9
Early female users of the MIRA Channel platform 
were unfamiliar with the use of feature phones. 
Those who owned mobile devices used them 
primarily for voice calls, and less frequently for messaging through SMS. Therefore, creating a user-friendly, animation-rich interface became a priority 
for ZMQ. Some sub-channels provide content over 
weekly segments, such as the prenatal channel in the weeks leading up to delivery, for example. To improve content navigation between weeks, ZMQ 
used big, bold arrows on either side of the main icon for the week (Figure 6). Field-testing revealed 
that this simple design feature worked better than 
the previous approach of using a sliding bar to 
toggle between weeks. An additional feature was incorporated for improving the way workers using MIRA Channel delivered information to women at 
high risk. Green (not-high-risk) and red (high-risk) 
dots next to the answers to questions allowed the CHWs to distinguish easily between high-risk and less at-risk patients, and select the appropriate 
information to provide.
Figure 6. 
On-screen illustration of weekly progress through pregnancy cycle (weeks 19 and 35) with large navigation icons, India
Example PositionUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World10
The digital solution
MIRA Channel CHWs are female community health-care 
workers who receive a basic stipend for their efforts. They 
work from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. daily, conducting house visits 
throughout their assigned communities. Generally, they have completed a full cycle of primary education (eight years of schooling) and live in the villages they serve.INSIGHT
Profile of a MIRA 
CHW
Figure 7. 
MIRA Midwife Toolkit, Uganda1 The MIRA Channel Individual App can be downloaded to 
mobile phones for individual use and self-management of 
maternal and neonatal health (MNH). The app also features a 
multiple registration function allowing groups of women to access their individual profiles from a single handset. Telecom recharge kiosks and community radio stations also serve 
as download stations to improve distribution. When users 
download the app for personal use, they are not networked into the broader public health-care and tracking system linked to the MIRA Channel Worker Toolkit.
2 The MIRA Channel Worker Toolkit is designed for the network of MIRA Channel CHWs who make regular house calls to register pregnant women, and children under 5 for routine 
immunization. MIRA Channel workers visit the registered 
women weekly to deliver the programme content from their smartphone devices. Registered data associated with either the health status of the mother or the immunization progress 
of the infant is then sent from the mobile to the central server 
and is shared with local PHCs.
3 MIRA-PHC Connect is a communication and service delivery platform that is connected to the Haryana State Rural Health 
Mission. The online platform communicates with two 
distinct apps customized for CHWs and their supervisors, the ANMs. During weekly visits, the CHW uses the MIRA Worker 
Toolkit (item 2 above) to ask expectant mothers a set of five 
symptomatic questions related to high-risk pregnancies. On the other app, the ANM Toolkit, nurses can view all of the pregnancy records registered by the CHW (Figure 9, right). 
Weekly checkup records are uploaded to the state health 
servers and redistributed to the CHWs. This integrated online platform allows state health workers to take timely action for supporting high-risk pregnancies. The platform also generates 
reports to inform policy decisions made by district health 
representatives.The MIRA Channel programme 
provides digital communication 
and health management tools 
while expanding the coverage of the public health service 
system among rural women and 
adolescent girls. The platform consists of three components: 
a mobile app, a health worker 
toolkit, and an analytics dashboard.Case Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development11
the given week, because either the CHW did not 
visit the home, or the patient was not present 
at the time of the visit. This data is then pushed 
from the CHW phone to the dashboard where it becomes available to the ANM through the ANM Toolkit. The ANM uses this information 
to track high-risk trends and plan health care 
follow-up needs. ANM action plans may include a community-level follow-up, calling the woman in for an ANC checkup, or referring the woman to 
the nearest hospital. Each action planned by the 
ANM is also registered in the toolkit, and the dot changes colour once the prescribed action has 
been fulfilled.Figure 9 displays screenshots of the dashboard 
report. The bottom of the report displays the 
names of each MIRA Channel CHW, the contact 
information of her assigned patients (pregnant women) and their current week of pregnancy. The dots and circles to the left of the ANM 
Toolkit shot represent the status of the mother 
in each week of her cycle. Every week the MIRA Channel CHW asks her patients five questions related to high-risk pregnancies. This patient’s 
yes/no responses are indicated by coloured 
circles, with ‘Yes’ corresponding to the red dot and ‘No’ corresponding to the green dot. Yellow 
dots represent responses that are missing for Figure 8. Architecture of 
the MIRA Channel-PHC Connect model
Figure 9.
 The MIRA Channel-PHC 
Connect online platform 
displaying a screenshot of 
the MIRA Channel Toolkit 
for CHWs (left) and the MIRA 
Channel ANM Toolkit (right)
© ZMQ/Hilmi Quraishi© ZMQ/Hilmi QuraishiUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World12
Most women accessing the MIRA Channel platform have little to no 
experience working with mobile phones and thus need training. 
During the training sessions, ZMQ invited children or adolescents 
with better digital literacy skills to work with their mothers or aunts to learn how to use the channel. This unintentionally created a network of younger stakeholders, which motivated ZMQ to develop content 
specifically catering to the needs and style of adolescent women. 
Therefore, the team began developing a new model of content delivery through digital storytelling and social mobile games. The success of the new content has created new opportunities to reach a 
larger audience as well as expand the original MIRA Channel delivery 
model.INSIGHT
Integrating 
unintended 
stakeholders 
can lead to new 
opportunitiesFigure 10. The MIRA model of delivery, expanding from core to 
value-added services
Figure 11. 
Worm Attack, Nine Minutes and Family Choices 
are examples of VAS games and stories 
developed by ZMQ. The company runs a 
programme called ‘Game Lab’ which involves 
game design workshops with communities 
to help them develop their own gaming 
storyboards on paper. The programme helps 
empower communities to identify local 
issues and arrive at unique solutions through 
gamification. Promising storyboards are then 
converted into digital games and used as a 
part of the MIRA Channel VAS model.The MIRA Channel model of delivery has two parts. The central focus is on communication and MNH service 
delivery. MNH services are provided to communities free of charge. The other part of the model is VAS (value 
added services), which consist of digital stories and social games.
© ZMQ/Hilmi Quraishi
© ZMQ/Hilmi QuraishiCase Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development13
DigComp2.1: The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens (Carretero 
et al., 2017), developed by the European Commission, provides 
a common reference on how to describe key areas of digital 
competence and proficiency levels among individuals. UNESCO has applied this framework to understand the minimum skills needed to use MIRA Channel and thirty-one other digital solutions. 
Benchmarking digital competences is recommended, because 
it provides a knowledge base which can then be used to design appropriate solutions and to track progress of skill development. Please refer to the forthcoming UNESCO landscape review Digital 
Inclusion for Low-skilled and Low-literate People for the DigComp2.1 
mapping and more information.RECOMMENDATION
Benchmark  
the digital 
competences 
of usersThe MIRA Channel CHW training approach began with working with motivated CHWs 
and developing them into master trainers. 
After developing a substantive base of master trainers, ZMQ began to deploy a cascade training approach in the target 
communities. Basic digital literacy training 
precedes the health-care service delivery approach with MIRA Channel, to make sure all workers have sufficient technical skills to 
operate the platform (Figure 12).The CHW training begins with the mobile device 
most comfortable for the volunteers. As they become 
comfortable with the phone functions, the training 
advances to operating the MIRA Channel Toolkit. The toolkit training is separated into three components. First volunteers learn to browse through the basic 
communication material. Next, they practise registering 
mothers and recording data. The third component involves analysing the patient data. Training materials include large posters, live presentations and training 
manuals for volunteers to take home.
Figure 12. Difference scores in digital literacy skills among 24 
CHWs from September 2013 to August 2014Example PositionUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World14
Monitoring and evaluation strategy
ZMQ believes that by creating a comprehensive 
digital health platform for new and expectant 
mothers and training CHWs on its implementation, 
it will enable the use of MCH services to increase in rural communities, leading to improved health practices among rural women.
The MIRA Channel platform produces real-time 
data through the MIRA-PHC Connect platform 
for timely decisions and action by community and state health workers. Information related to consultation schedules, immunization records and ANC health is all part of the monitoring and 
evaluation strategy. Usage statistics such as user 
access frequency and time spent viewing each message are all tracked and sent to the MIRA Channel dashboard, providing an up-to-the-minute 
snapshot of each registered mother. The toolkit not 
only aids the health workers in providing consistent information to patients, but improves transparency among CHWs and facilitates improved care for 
women with high-risk pregnancies.
Figure 13. Screenshots of the MIRA Channel dashboard displaying  
the pregnant women tracker with ANC status and delivery status (top) and child immunization tracker (bottom)Case Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development15
Results to date
MIRA Channel has a current reach of 
over 850,000 women, children and 
adolescent girls, including a roll-out 
with the Haryana Livelihood Mission involving 511,000 women.
ZMQ expanded its distribution through 
a productive collaboration with telecom 
recharge kiosks and community radio 
stations. It partnered with recharge centres to help community women 
download the MIRA Channel app, 
games and digital stories to their phones. Similarly, ZMQ partnered with local radio stations to help promote the 
service and the recharge kiosks in the 
communities.In the MIRA Channel intervention area in the Mewat district, there has been a 55 per cent increase in ANC consultations 
and 49 per cent increase in institutional deliveries, while 
child immunization rates have increased by 41 per cent (Net Hope, 2017). The MIRA Channel PHC-Connect model is being scaled to 180 government-sponsored CHWs and 
25 ANMs reaching 69,000 women. Positive outcomes 
from India have led to an adaptation of the MIRA Channel for implementation in Uganda and Afghanistan, where 66,000 and 43,000 women, children and girls are using the 
solution. Results have shown that almost 3,000 Ugandan 
and 1,700 Afghani women have successfully completed their pregnancies using MIRA Channel. Another 10,200 Ugandan 
children and young women have received immunizations, 
with an additional 5,200 immunizations in Afghanistan.
© ZMQ/Hilmi QuraishiUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World16
Sustainability and future plans
The total operating budget across the three sites 
in India, Uganda and Afghanistan is US$600,000. 
Funds have come in the form of a grant from 
bilateral agencies including the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), USAID and the UK Department for International 
Development (DfID). In addition to grant funding, 
ZMQ has generated US$125,000 in revenue through the VAS model by selling digital stories and social mobile games to registered users.
MIRA Channel has been adapted for Uganda and 
Afghanistan with contextualized content including graphics and messages in the local languages. ZMQ is planning to reach out to more countries 
in Africa and expand to cover all of Afghanistan 
by adaptation to more languages and contexts. Beyond geographic expansion, ZMQ will soon expand its content delivery to include a skills 
development channel with a variety of livelihood 
development training courses and capacity-building tools for women and girls.In addition to providing health-care information and edutainment content using social games and 
digital stories, ZMQ is working on two categories 
of skills development and training content. The first category is educational content for children and young people. This will primarily be basic 
literacy content for learning to read and write 
in Hindi and English as well as basic numeracy content.
The second category is training content. Another 
ZMQ project called Ajeevika Connect provides 
basic content for learning how to code. This model has already been tested through a rural entrepreneurship programme working in self-
help groups in the Mewat area. Ajeevika Connect 
is now being integrated into the suite of MIRA Channel offerings. Other mobile-based training content includes soft-skills training, financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship training, and promotion 
and marketing training.
Figure 15. MIRA Channel Afghanistan Figure 14. MIRA Channel UgandaCase Study: MIRA Channel by ZMQ Development17
Lessons learned and recommendations
Be patient. When working with rural 
communities, ZMQ has found that it is important 
to work at a reasonable pace and not to rush 
through the implementation process. Adapting to local contexts is critical and takes time.
Be inclusive. ZMQ has tried to develop 
a culture of collaboration and inclusion where 
local groups are viewed as stakeholders and 
not just beneficiaries. Trust and buy-in about the design and implementation approach are necessary at the beginning of the process.
Be adaptive . Developing a functioning 
business model for lifeline services like MCH is 
not easy. The strategy will take time and is still 
evolving even after initial success. It is important to be flexible and view development work as a continuous process.Plan for skills development.  
Developing digital skills will allow for more advanced multimedia and diversified topical 
content beyond health, such as skills development, 
literacy, livelihood training and entrepreneurship development. ZMQ hopes to build on the strong user base already accessing the health content to 
provide more services to meet the requirements of 
women, children and adolescent girls in need.
Design for populations with 
low literacy levels. ZMQ’s use of 
icon-based images, localized audio and video, 
and one-click interfaces enabled uptake among 
individuals with low levels of literacy. Preliminary design workshops with low-literate communities improved the final content and digital products.© ZMQ/Hilmi QuraishiUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World18
Contact information
ZMQ Development identifies critical social problems of under-resourced communities and designs digital 
solutions for them. ZMQ’s methodology for addressing social problems is based on a ‘system-changing’ approach across interdisciplinary domains such as health care, education, livelihood development and climate change.
References
 
 Carretero, S., Vuorikari, R. and Punie, Y. 2017. DigComp 2.1: The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens with eight profi¬ciency levels and examples of use. Luxembourg, Publication Office of the European Union.
Ericsson. 2017. Ericsson Mobility Report 2017. https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/mobility-report/documents/2017/ericsson-
mobility-report-june-2017-rina.pdf (Accessed 10 August 2017.)
Graham, W. Woodd, S., Byass, P ., Filippi, V., Gon, G., Virgo, S., Chou, D., Hounton, S., Lozano, R., Pattinson, R. and Singh, S. 2016. 
Diversity and divergence: the dynamic burden of poor maternal health. The Lancet, Vol. 388, No. 10056, pp. 2164–75.
GSMA. 2015. Bridging the Gender Gap: Mobile Access and Usage in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/GSM0001_03232015_GSMAReport_NEWGRAYS-Web.pdf (Accessed 26 
August 2017.)
IIPS (International Institute for Population Sciences). 2016. National Family Health Survey-4 2015–2016: state fact sheet, Haryana. 
http://rchiips.org/NFHS/factsheet_NFHS-4.shtml (Accessed 26 August 2017.)
India. 2015. Rural Health Statistics. New Delhi, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Statistics Division. https://www.
indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/content/417010/rural-health-statistics-2014-15/ (Accessed 26 August 2017.)
ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2016. ICT Development Index 2016: India Country Card. https://www.itu.int/net4/
ITU-D/idi/2016/#idi2016countrycard-tab&IND (Accessed 16 October 2017.)
IVAC (International Vaccine Access Center). 2015. Pneumonia and Diarrhea Progress Report 2015: Sustainable Progress in the Post-2015 
Era. Baltimore, Md., Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. https://www.jhsph.edu/research/centers-and-institutes/
ivac/resources/IVAC-2015-Pneumonia-Diarrhea-Progress-Report.pdf (Accessed 26 August 2017.)
Manav, S. 2015. Mortality indicators show dismal state of healthcare NHM. Tribune, 7 August. https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/
haryana/governance/mortality-indicators-show-dismal-state-of-healthcare-nhm/116504.html (Accessed 9 October 2017.)
Net Hope. 2017. ZMQ scales MIRA: a mobile channel on RMNCH+A for rural women. http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/case_
studies/view/mira-mobile-channel-on-rmncha-for-rural-women (Accessed 9 November 2017.)
NIMS (National Institute of Medical Sciences, India), ICMR (Indian Council of Medical Research) and UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 
2012. Infant and Child Mortality in India: Levels, Trends and Determinants. New Delhi, NIMS, ICMR and UNICEF. http://unicef.in/
PressReleases/374/The-Infant-and-Child-Mortality-India-Report (Accessed 26 August 2017.)
UNICEF. n.d.a. Maternal health. http://unicef.in/Whatwedo/1/Maternal-Health (Accessed 26 August 2017.)–––. n.d.b. Neonatal health. http://unicef.in/Whatwedo/2/Neonatal-Health- (Accessed 26 August 2017.)
WHO (World Health Organization). 2015. India: WHO statistical profile.  
http://www.who.int/gho/countries/ind.pdf?ua=1  
(Accessed 26 August 2017.)
www.zmqdev.org and www.mirachannel.org hilmi@zmq.in
This case study was commissioned by UNESCO and Pearson as part of the UNESCO-Pearson 
Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World. The views and opinions expressed in this case study are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Authors: Nathan M. Castillo, Education Consultant, and Steven Vosloo, Section of Youth, Literacy 
and Skills Development, Education Sector, UNESCO.
UNESCO is grateful to ZMQ Development for their support in developing this case study.Stay in touch
en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative
www.projectliteracy.comICTliteracy@unesco.org
UNESCO Education Sector
Education is UNESCO’s top priority because it is a basic 
human right and the foundation on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through education with a special focus on gender equality and Africa.
About Pearson 
Pearson is a digital education company, with expertise in 
educational courseware and assessment, and a range of teaching and learning services powered by technology. Our mission is to help people make progress through access to better learning. We believe that learning opens up opportunities, creating fulfilling careers and better lives. The Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized agency 
for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides guidance for the implementation of this ambitious goal and commitments.
About Project Literacy 
Project Literacy is a global campaign founded and 
convened by Pearson to make significant and sustainable advances in the fight against illiteracy so that all people - regardless of geography, language, race, class, or gender – have the opportunity to fulfill their potential throughthe power of words.
ED/PLS/YLS/2017/15