Texila International Journal of Academic research  
ISSN: 2520-3088 
DOI: 10.21522/TIJAR.2014.07.02.Art007  
Mobile  Learning  Support  in Delivering  Distance  Education:  Perception  of 
Students  of University  of Cape  Coast,  Ghana  
Douglas Yeboah1*, Paul Nyagorme2, Kwaku Barfi3 
1Cape  Coast  Study Centre , Institute  for Distance  and e-Learning,  University  of Educat ion, 
Winneba,  Ghana  
2College  of Distance  Education,  University  of Cape  Coast,  Cape  Coast,  Ghana  
3Sam Jonah  Library,  University  of Cape  Coast,  Cape  Coast,  Ghana  
*Corresponding  Author : douglas.yeboah@stu.ucc.edu.gh  
Abstract  
This paper  explored  the perception  of University  of Cape  Coast  distance  education  students  on the 
use of mobile  technologies  to facilitate  interactions  among  students  and tutors  as a learning -support  
system . The paper  aimed  at establi shing wheth er distance  education  students  would  accept  to be 
taught  using  a blend  of mobile  technolog ies and biweekly  direct  face-to-face tutorials on weekend s. A 
questionnaire  was used to colle ct data from a sample  of 300 students  pursuing  various  Diploma,  
Bachelor’ s and Master’s degrees  by distance  at University  of Cape  Coast  using  systematic  sampling  
technique . The data was analys ed using  descriptive  statistics.  It was found  that scheduled  face-to-face 
tutorial  sessions  of distance  education  in University  of Cape  Coast were  not supportive  enough  to 
address  students’ learning  needs . Also,  all the respondents  possessed  mobile  devices  and perceived  
blending  of mobile  learning  in distance  educati on as an avenue to enhance  collaborati ve learning  
with faculty  and colleagu es. It was recommended  that curriculum  and instructional  designers  of 
distance  education  courses  must  consider  incorporating  mobile  learning  pedagogies  in the distance  
courses  and learning  experiences  to address  students’ learning  needs  using  mobile  techno logies . 
Keywords:  blended  learning,  distance  education,  learning  technologies,  m-learning,  online  teaching,  
transactional  distance.  
Introduction  
The expeditious  development  of information 
and communication  technology  (ICT) has 
contributed  to the introduction of new ways of 
delivering lessons to students. Distance 
education  is one of such new approaches. Based 
on this assertion,  the ways of lesson delivery and 
acquisition of knowledge are not restricted by 
space and location any more. According  to 
Bušelić (2012), there are technologies  that can 
offer flexibility  in when, how and where 
students can acquire knowledge.  Students 
worldwide  enroll in distance education  
programmes  as a way of increasing access to 
formal education  to otherwise  disadvantaged  
individuals (Collins, McKinnies  & Collins, 
2010). 
Distance education  has been conceptualized  
by various authors. In the view of Larson and 
Owusu-Acheaw (2016), distance education  is a 
form of education where learners have minimal physical contact with their tutors. In a similar 
vein, Mabawonku  (2004), described  distance 
education  as a form of education  in which there 
is geographical  separation  between the learner 
and the learning institution. Such separation  
between distance learners and their lecturers is 
often a barrier to interaction  among the students, 
their peers and lecturers which is otherwise  
necessary  to support students’ effective learning. 
Learning is most successful  for students when 
they are able to interact with each other through 
interrogating  and sharing of ideas (Darling-
Hammond,  Flook, Cook-Harvey, Barron & 
Osher, 2019). However,  learning tends to be 
problematic when interaction  between lecturers 
and students are irregular. The incorporation  of 
mobile technologies,  such as smart phones and 
tablet computers in distance education  can 
address this gap. Blending distance education  
with social interactions  using mobile 
technologies  can enhance easy communication  
between distant learners and lecturers, as well as 
1 
 between students and peers. According  to 
Makoe (2013), the introduction of mobile 
technologies  in blended learning holds 
considerable  promise for distance education  as a 
cognitive delivery tool to enhance collaborati ve 
learning. 
Blended learning refers to a learning process 
that involves use of a combination of technology  
and direct face-to-face contacts (Singh, 2012). In 
the view of Kintu, Zhu and Kagambe  (2017), 
adopting blended learning balances success 
between distance education  using technology  
and traditional  face-to-face learning approaches.  
Examples of blended learning include a 
combination  of e-learning modules and time-
tabled online tutorials using chat room facilities 
that are integrated  into a learning management 
system (LMS). 
In Ghana, the situation of inadequate  
interaction among distance education students 
and their tutors are not different. Some 
Universities  in Ghana scheduled face-to-face 
weakened  meetings between their distance 
students and tutors to deliver lessons. 
Statement  of the Problem  
Tertiary institutions  are embracing  a number 
of innovations  in pedagogies and some of these 
involve the use of technology  in blended 
learning. The pedagogy of blended learning 
(combination  of face-to-face and online 
teaching/learning) initiatives  is part of these 
innovations . However,  the efficiency of some of 
these innovations , especially  among University  
of Cape Coast distance education  students faces 
challenges. 
From informal interactions  the researcher s 
had with some distance education  students of the 
University  of Cape Coast, it was revealed that 
some of the students have difficulty 
understanding  the course content discussed  at 
face-to-face biweekly tutorials sessions. Some of 
the distance education  students complained that 
they were not afforded sufficient  opportunities 
to clarify their misunderstandings  at tutorial 
sessions because so much contents were hastily 
discussed  by tutors in a limited time. 
There is numerous literature that support the 
use of mobile devices to facilitate 
communication among students and tutors or 
lecturers to support collaborative  learning in distance education  environmen ts (Yousuf, 2006; 
Kukulska –Hulme & Traxler, 2005). The use of 
mobile devices is suitable especially  in learning 
environments where time is a limited asset. 
However,  there is literature gap on how distance 
education  students in Ghana perceive the 
usefulness  of mobile learning as a supportive  
pedagogy  to enhance their interaction with peers 
and course tutors to facilitate their learning. This 
study sought to address this gap. 
Purpose  of the Study  
The purpose of this study was to find out 
whether distance education students in Ghana 
accept the blend of weekend face-to-face 
tutorials at two weeks intervals with mobile 
learning support system outside the tutorial 
sessions. 
Research  Objectives  
The objectives of the study were to: 
1. determine the extent to which distance 
education  students desire for additional  
learning support systems besides their 
scheduled  biweekly face-to-face tutorial 
sessions. 
2. find out the proportion of distance education  
students who owned mobile devices. 
3. determine  the extent of distance education  
students’ willingness  to use mobile devices 
as a complement to face-to-face learning 
activities. 
4. determine  how distance education  students 
perceive the effectiveness  of blending 
mobile learning pedagogy with face-to-face 
tutorial sessions. 
Research  Questions  
1 To what extent do distance education  
students desire for additional  learning 
support systems besides their scheduled 
biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions? 
2 What proportion  of distance education 
students own mobile devices? 
3 To what extent are distance education 
students willing to use mobile devices as a 
complement to face-to-face learning 
activities? 
4 How do distance education  students 
perceive the effectiveness  of blending 
mobile learning pedagogy with face-to-face 
tutorial sessions? 
2 
 Meaning  of Mobile  Learning  
There have been a number of definitions  of 
the concept of mobile learning by different 
authors. Among these, Quin (2001), Brown 
(2005) and Crescente  and Lee (2011) are of the 
view that mobile learning is a subset or 
extension  of e-learning through mobile 
computatio nal devices. Others also perceive 
mobile-learning as the processes  of acquiring  
knowledge  “through conversations  across 
multiple contexts among people and personal 
interactive technologies”  (Sharples,  Taylor & 
Vavoula, 2007:224). El-Hussein (2010) defined 
mobile learning as “any type of learning that 
takes place in learning environments  and spaces 
that take account of the mobility of technology,  
mobility of the learner and mobility of learning” 
(p. 20). Keegan (2005) defines mobile learning 
as learning accomplished  with the use of small, 
portable computing  devices such as 
smartphones,  personal digital assistants  (PDAs) 
and similar handheld devices. 
One of the paramount  features of mobile 
learning emphasized  in all definitions  is that it 
involves the use of devices that are portable and 
convenient  for learners to carry with them 
anywhere,  anytime and enable learners to access 
sources of learning materials or information  at 
any time anywhere  as opposed to devices that 
are required to be fixed at a place like the 
desktop computer.  Recent innovations  in 
software applications  and social media software 
using Web 2.0 technologies  (e.g., blogs, wikis, 
Twitter, YouTube,  WhatsApp ) or social 
networking  sites (such as Facebook  and 
Myspace) have made mobile devices 
continuously changing and spreading. Also, 
mobile devices give assurance  of more potential 
usage in education . 
Blending  Mobile  Learning  in Distance  
Education  
The rate of penetration and ubiquitous nature 
of mobile devices present tremendous  
opportunities  to educators,  particularly  those 
involved in distance education,  to utilize these 
devices to provide support for enhancement  of 
teaching and learning. Besides high rate of 
penetration, mobile devices present other 
advantages  which make them suitable for use in 
supporting  learning in distance education 
(Becking et al, 2008). These advantages  include 
the use for independent and collaborativ e learning experiences  and affordability.  Due to 
these and more advantages  of mobile devices, 
they are thus used in distance education  to 
address variety of student needs. 
One of the challenges  encountered by 
distance education  students is a sense of 
isolation which comes as a result of the 
geographic distance separating students from 
their peers, and between students and their tutors 
(Galusha,  1997; Gibson & Graff, 1992). In 
addressing  this challenge  for distance learners, 
mobile devices are used to increase interaction 
among students and between students and 
faculty. Mobile devices are also used to support 
collaborative  learning (Yousuf, 2006; 
Kukulska –Hulme & Traxler, 2005). 
Furthermore, mobile devices are used by faculty 
to provide immediate  feedback to distance 
learners as part of improvement  in their 
interactivity.  
As reported by Foti and Mendez (2014), 
mobile learning affords both students and 
faculty the additional  opportunity  to 
conveniently access information instantaneously  
regardless  of their location. By so doing, 
learning thus occurs anywhere at any time 
through the use of mobile devices. 
The preceding  discussion  of literature 
establishes  the foundation  for variety of reasons 
and applications  of mobile technolog ies in 
distance education  to facilitate students’ 
learning. However,  there is not much empirical  
evidence supporting  the awareness  of distance 
education  students in Ghana regarding  the 
benefits of blending mobile learning pedagogy 
in the teaching and learning processes of 
distance education . 
Theoretical  Framewor k 
The study was underpinned by transactional  
distance theory which defines critical concepts 
of distance learning. Moore (1997) viewed 
transactional  distance as a distance which is 
considered as not being a geographic  separation  
but as a pedagogical  concept. The theory allows 
for a programme  in which the principal form of 
communication  is through technology  and where 
technology -mediated communication  is ancillary 
to the classroom  (Moore, 2007). According to 
Tatar, Roschelle,  Vabey and Pennuel (2003) the 
latter programme  is important for mobile 
learning because mobile devices are used in the 
school settings as an ancillary element but 
3 
 mostly extend beyond the classroom  to non-
traditional, informal and non-institutional  
settings. This view is supported  by Park (2011) 
who revealed that the nature of transactional  
theory and its applicability  makes it useful for 
mobile learning. 
Educational  applications  of mobile learning 
can be classified based on the transactional 
distance theory. Park (2011) modified the 
transactional  distance theory and used it to 
classify mobile learning into four categories  viz. 
high transactional distance socialized  m-
learning, high transactional  distance 
individualized  m-learning, low transactional  
distance socialized  m-learning and low 
transactional  distance individualized m-learning. 
In high transactional  distance socialized 
mobile learning activity, learners are said to 
have more psychological  and communication  
space with their teacher (Park, 2011). The 
learners engage in group learning where they 
communic ate and collaborate with one another. 
Also, the learning resources are provided from a 
predetermined  programme  through mobile 
devices. Communication mainly occur among 
learners, and the teacher has little involvement  
in facilitating  the group activity. 
In high transactional distance and 
Individualized  mobile learning activity, the 
individual  learners have more psychological and 
communication  space with the instructor or 
instructio nal support (Park, 2011). According  to 
her, the individual  learners receive well 
organized content and resources  through mobile 
devices. The individual  learners receive the 
content and control their learning process in 
order to master it and the interactio ns are usually 
carried out between the individual  learner and 
the content. This type of mobile device 
application  learning demonstrates  an expansion  
of the scope of e-learning which allows greater 
flexibility  and portability . 
A third type of mobile technology application  
in learning is the low transactional  distance and 
socialized  mobile learning activity in which 
individual learners communicate  with the 
teacher and fellow learners through mobile 
devices (Park, 2011). According  to Park (2011), 
the learners have less psychological  and 
communic ation space with the instructor  and the 
instruction is loosely structured. This type is said 
to demonstrate  the most advanced form in terms of the variety of mobile devices and learners’ 
social interactions.  
This last type which is the low transactional  
distance and individualized  mobile learning 
activity refers to less psychological  and 
communication  space between instructor and 
learner. On this basis, individual learners can 
interact directly with the instructor and the 
instructor  leads and controls the learning in an 
effort to meet learners’ needs while maintaining  
their independence  (Park, 2011). This type has 
the features of mobile learning that supports 
blended mode. 
Materials  and Methods  
Research  Design  
The research methodolo gy employed in this 
study was descriptive  quantitative  methodology . 
The descriptive methodology  has varied 
approaches  such as observation  studies, 
correlational research and survey research. 
Among the various approaches  to descriptive  
methodology , survey research design was used 
in this study because it was found to be most 
suitable. Survey research, as described  by Leedy 
and Ormrod (2010, p.187), involves obtaining 
information  about the characteristics,  opinions, 
attitudes or previous experiences  of one or more 
groups of people, perhaps by asking them 
questions  and tabulating their answers. The 
ultimate goal of survey research design is to 
generalize findings to a larger population.  
The choice of survey design for this study 
was due to its merit of gathering various 
responses  from a wide range of people. 
Furthermore,  descriptive survey helps to present 
the true state of affairs of a given situation after 
data have been collected from a number of 
people who respond to the same set of questions  
about a given situation (Gay, 1992). This 
approach is more suitable for this research 
because it was intended to acquire information 
about the attitude of distance learners 
concerning  the possibility of blending mobile 
learning pedagogy  in instructional activities. 
Samp ling Procedure  
Systematic  sampling technique was used to 
select the participants of the study. The sample 
included students pursuing various programmes  
at Master’s degree, Bachelor’ s degree and 
4 
 Diploma levels. They comprised  three hundred 
students studying at the Cape Coast study center 
of the College of Distance Education, University 
of Cape Coast. The use of random sampling was 
informed by its merit of enhancing  representativeness  of the population  by the 
sample. The breakdown of the constituent  of the 
sample according  to academic  levels were 
presented  in Table 1. 
Table  1. Breakdown of respondents  included in the study 
 Diploma  Bachelor’s  degree  Master’s  degree  Total  
Population  1340 730 215 2285 
Sample 134 134 32 300 
Source : of population  figures: UCC-SRIMS, Record Guide (2019). 
As indicated in Table 1, the sample of the 
study consisted of 134 students pursuing various 
programmes  at each of Diploma and Bachelor’s 
degree levels and 215 students at the Master’s 
degree level. Thus, a total of 300 sample size 
was obtained for the study. 
Data  Collectio n and Analysis  
A questionnaire was used as an instrument  to 
collect data for the study. Questionnaire  is a 
useful and widely used instrument for collecting  
survey information, providing  structured  and 
often numerical data in various scales of 
measurement  such as nominal and ordinal. Also, 
it is useful for the collection  of data without the 
presence of the researcher,  and it is often 
comparatively straight forward to analyse 
(Cohen, Manion & Marrison,  2005). 
Questionnaire is a very effective instrument  for 
acquiring factual information about practices 
and conditions  of which the respondents are 
presumed  to have knowledge . It is also suitable 
for enquiring  into the opinions and attitudes of 
respondents . Furthermore, questionnaire  was 
deemed appropriate  for this study because the 
respondents were all literate in English 
language. 
The questionnaire  items were adapted from 
related studies conducted in other parts of the 
world (Vyas & Nirban, 2014; Alsaadati,  2017). 
Relevant information  from the literature 
reviewed aided in the design of the 
questionnaire  which consisted of three sections. 
The first section of the questionnaire  centered on 
the demographic information  about the 
responden ts while the second section focused on 
finding out about whether students owned 
mobile devices and which mobile devices were 
owned by the students. The third and final part focused on finding out whether students 
perceived that their learning needs were satisfied 
through the scheduled biweekly weekend face-
to-face tutorial sessions alone, or they needed 
additional learning support from their peers and 
lecturers. Also, the final part of the 
questionnaire  enquired whether students would 
embrace academic  support from peers and 
lecturers offered through mobile devices besides 
the scheduled face-to-face tutorial sessions. 
The Scale  
The content and face validity of the 
questionnaire  were established with the help of 
two lecturers in Education al Technology . Also, 
the reliability  of the instrument was tested using 
Statistical  Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) 
after a pilot test. The reliability  test produced 
Cronbach's  Alpha of 0.742 on 20 responses  of 8 
items. The Cronbach’s Alpha obtained was 
greater than the recommended  acceptable  
minimum value of 0.70, therefore the instrument  
was found to be reliable enough to be used for 
the main study. 
Data  Collection  Procedures  
The researchers  visited various lecture rooms 
in turns and sought permission  from the course 
tutors. They explained  the purpose of the study 
to the various classes and sought the consent of 
students who wished to voluntarily  participate  in 
the study. In each class, after some students 
volunteered to participate  in the study, a 
systematic  random sampling technique  was used 
to select a sample. Subsequently,  copies of the 
questionnaire  were given to the sample for 
completion.  For each class the researchers  
visited, the participants  completed  the 
questionnaire s and returned same to the former 
on the same day. 
5 
 Data  Processing  and Analysis  
The data obtained from the completed  
questionnaires  were screened, coded and 
analyzed using descriptive  statistics. 
Frequencies  and percentages  were generated  for 
responses  to the various questionnaire  items 
using IBM Statistical  Package for the Social 
Sciences (IBM SPSS) version 25. The 
descriptive  statistics so generated were further 
presented  in frequency  tables. Results  
The study targeted all students pursuing 
various undergraduate  and graduate programme s 
by distance at the Cape Coast study center of the 
College of Distance Education  (CoDE) of the 
University  of Cape Coast, in Ghana. However, a 
sample was drawn to participate  in the study. 
The data obtained on sex characteristics of the 
participants  were presented  in Table 2. 
Table  2. Distribution of participants  by sex 
Sex No. of Students Percent age (%) 
Male 160 53.3 
Female 140 46.7 
Total  300 100.0  
As shown in Table 2, the participants  
consisted of 300 distance education students. 
These comprised 160 males representing  53% 
and 140 females (48%). This shows the number 
of male students who participated  in the study slightly outnumbered  the female counterpa rts. 
The study also obtained data on the academic 
levels at which the participants  pursued various 
programme s. This data was presented in Table 
3. 
Table  3. Distribution  of Respondents  by Programme  Level 
Programme  Level  No. of Stud ents Perc entage (%) 
Diploma 134 44.7 
Bachelor' s Degree 134 44.7 
Master's Degree 32 10.6 
Total  300 100.0  
The data presented  in Table 3 indicates that 
the participants  were pursuing various 
programmes at the Diploma, Bachelor’s and 
Master’s degree levels. At each of diploma and 
bachelor’s degree levels, 134 students 
representing about 45% participated  in the 
study. The least number of participants  being 32 
(approximately 11%) were pursuing 
programm es at the Master’s degree level. 
Research  Question  1: To what extent do 
distance education  students desire for additional  
learning support systems besides their scheduled  
biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions? The study sought for information  from the 
participants as to whether they perceived  
biweekly weekend face-to-face tutorial sessions 
to be sufficiently supportive  to their learning or 
they desired for additional  learning support 
systems. Item 7 on the questionnaire  made a 
positive declaration  that: “Face-to-face tutorial 
sessions held every other weekend are sufficient  
for distance learners to effectively  learn all they 
need to learn.”. The participants indicated their 
perception  by selecting one of five-point Likert 
scale responses ranging from strongly disagree 
to strongly agree. Their responses were 
presented  in Table 4. 
Table  4. Students’ contentment  with biweekly weekend face-to-face tutorial sessions 
Responses  No. of Students  Percent age (%) 
Strongly Agree 2 0.7 
Agree 8 2.7 
Neutral 35 11.7 
Disagree 157 52.3 
Strongly Disagree 98 32.7 
Total  300 100.0  
6The data in Table 4 showed that 255 
participants  representing  85% disagreed with the 
statement that biweekly face-to-face tutorial 
sessions were sufficiently  supportive for their 
learning. This was an indication that the greatest 
majority of the participants felt that their 
learning needs were not satisfied by the 
biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions alone. 
As a follow-up to the data obtained in Table 
4, item 11 of the questionnaire made a negative statement that “Face-to-face tutorial sessions 
held every other weekend alone are Not 
sufficient  for distance students to effectively  
learn all they need to learn”. This statement was 
meant to solicit perceptions of the participants 
regarding  whether and the extent to which they 
felt face-to-face tutorial sessions alone did not 
meet their learning needs and therefore they 
desired for extra learning support systems. Their 
responses  were presented  in Table 5. 
Table  5. Distance education  students’ perception that biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions alone do not 
meet their learning needs 
Responses  No. of Students  Percent age (%) 
Strongly Agree 105 35 
Agree 177 59 
Neutral 0 0 
Disagree 18 6 
Strongly Disagree 0 0 
Total 300 100 
The data presented in Table 5 indicated that 
282 participants representing  94% agreed that 
biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions held on 
weekends alone did not meet their learning 
needs. It was evident that majority of the 
participan ts had perception that biweekly face-
to-face tutorial sessions alone were not sufficient  
to meet their learning needs. This confirmed  the 
findings from Table 4. Supplementary learning 
support systems would therefore be desirable. Research question  2: What proportion of 
distance education students own mobile 
devices?  
The study solicited responses  from the 
participants  to the question: “Do you have a 
mobile communication  device?”. The purpose of 
this question was to ascertain the proportion  of 
students who had mobile communication  
devices that could be used in mobile learning 
pedagogy. Responses from the participants  to 
this question were summarized in Table 6. 
Table  6. Proportion  of distance students who owned mobile devices 
Responses  No. of Stud ents Percentage (%) 
Yes 300 100 
No 0 0 
Tota l 300 100 
The data presented in Table 6 showed that all 
the participants  (100%) owned mobile 
communication devices. 
In an attempt to find out the specific mobile 
communication devices the participants  owned, 
a follow-up question was posed: “If yes, which mobile communication  devices do you have?”. 
Alternative  choices provided by the 
questionnaire  were smart phone, tablet, laptop 
and ‘other’ (to be specified by respondents ). The 
responses obtained were summarized  in Table 7. 
 
Table 7. Mobile devices possessed  by distance students 
Responses  No. of Stud ents Percent age (%) 
Smart phone 135 45.0 
Smart phone and Laptop 119 39.7 
Smart phone and Tablet 11 3.7 
Tablet and Laptop 35 11.7 
Total  300 100.0  
7The data presented in the Table 7 revealed 
that 135 participants representing  45% owned 
smart phones alone, 119 (40%) owned both 
smart phones and laptop computers, 11 (4%) 
owned smart phones and tablets, and 35 (12%) 
owned both tablets and laptop computers.  It was 
evident from the data that 265 participants  
representing  88% owned either a smart phone 
alone or a smart phone and another mobile 
device. Also, all the participants possessed  some 
kind of mobile communication  devices. 
Research  question  3: To what extent are 
distance education students willing to use 
mobile devices as a complement to face-to-face 
learning activities? 
The participants  were further probed to affirm 
whether they would be willing to participate  in mobile learning activities with their course 
mates and tutors/lecturers besides their biweekly 
face-to-face tutorial sessions. This was 
accomplis hed through item 10 of the 
questionnaire  which stated that “If formal 
arrangements  are made by the university  for 
lecturers/tutors  and students to use mobile 
applications such as WhatsApp messenger  to 
discuss academic work anytime, anywhere ; I 
will seriously participate ”. The respondents  
indicated their level of willingness  to participate 
in mobile learning activities by choosing an 
option in the continuum  from strongly disagree 
to strongly agree on a five-point Likert scale. 
The responses  obtained were presented in Table 
8. 
Table  8. Students’  willingness to participate  in mobile learning activities besides face-to-face tutorial 
sessions 
Respo nses No. of Stud ents Perc entag e (%) 
Strongly Agree 
Agree 
Neutral 
Disagree 
Strongly Disagree 146 
154 
0 
0 
0 48.7 
51.3 
0 
0 
0 
Total 300 100 
The summary of responses  presented  in Table 
8 indicated that all the 300 respondents  
representing  100% agreed that they would 
willingly participate in mobile learning activities 
to complement the scheduled  biweekly face-to-
face tutorial sessions. 
Research  question  4: How do distance 
education  students perceive the effectiven ess of 
blending mobile learning pedagogy  with face-to-
face tutorial sessions? 
The study solicited information  on how the 
participants perceived the effectiveness of blending mobile learning pedagogy with 
biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions. This was 
accomplished by asking the subjects to make a 
comparison of two modes of distance education 
delivery and select one they perceived  would 
help students learn better. The first mode 
involved only biweekly face-to-face tutorial 
sessions while the other mode involved a blend 
of the earlier mode with mobile learning 
activities that would be available to learners 
anytime in their convenience. Responses of the 
participants  were summarized  in Table 9. 
Table  9. Students’ comparison  of distance education  delivery modes 
Response s No. of Students Percent age (%) 
Only face-to-face tutorials  5  2.0 
Blended face-to-face tutorials and mobile learning 295  98.0 
Total  300 100.0  
The data in Table 9 showed that 295 
participants  (98%) were in favour of blended 
face-to-face tutorial sessions with mobile 
learning support in distance education delivery. 
This data gave indication  that the participants  
perceived distance education  delivery mode that 
involve a blend of mobile learning pedagogy 
with face-to-face tutorial sessions as being more effective in supporting  students’ learning than 
only biweekly face-to-face tutorial sessions. 
Discussion  
The analysis of the data revealed that a great 
majority of the participants  being 85% disagreed 
with the statement that biweekly face-to-face 
tutorial sessions were sufficiently  supportive for 
8 
 their learning. Also, 94% of the participants  
agreed that biweekly face-to-face tutorial 
sessions held on weekends alone did not meet 
their learning needs. These two findings from 
the study revealed that distance education  
students of the University of Cape Coast deeply 
desired for additional learning support systems 
that would adequately  address their learning 
needs. Consistent with the findings of this study, 
Hagel and Shaw (2006) also found in a study in 
which students compared face-to-face study 
mode to web-based mode that the students 
perceived  the latter study mode to be more 
functional than the former. 
It was also found that all the participants 
being 100% possessed  smart phones. In addition 
to the smart phones, some owned tablet 
computer s and or laptop computers. This finding 
is consistent with Huang (2016) and Hussin, 
Manap, Amir and Krish (2012). Huan observed 
that among Chinese undergraduate  students, 
mobile phones were a major mobile technology  
that they possessed and 100% of the Chinese 
students who participated in his study owned 
mobile phones before starting college. Similarly,  
Hussin et al. found that all the students sampled 
in two Malaysian  universities owned mobile 
phones. This makes mobile phones a feasible 
technology  for pedagogical use in university 
education. 
All the participants (100%) affirmed that they 
were willing to participate  in mobile learning 
activities if implemen ted by the university  for 
them to interact with fellow students and 
tutors/lecture rs in connection  with academic 
work anytime, anywhere, besides their 
scheduled  biweekly weekend face-to-face 
tutorial sessions. This finding is consistent with 
Economides  and Grousopoulou  (2010) who 
observed that university students were most 
likely to use their mobile devices for obtaining  
information about lessons and exams, and 
arranging meetings with classmates. Also, the 
finding underscores  that distance education  in 
Ghana is characteriz ed by high transactional  
distance and individualized  learning (Park, 
2011) which students perceive does not 
sufficiently meet their learning needs. As a 
result, the students desired for low transactional  
distance and socialized  mobile learning 
activities in which individual  learners 
communicat e with the teachers and fellow 
learners through mobile devices. Finally, 98% of the participant s expressed  
their perception  that distance education  delivery 
involving  a blend of fortnight face-to-face 
tutorial sessions with mobile learning activities 
that are always accessible to students would be 
more effective than only weekend face-to-face 
tutorial sessions held fortnightly. This finding is 
also consistent  with Huang (2016). Huang found 
that Chinese undergraduate students were 
optimistic  about the potential benefits of mobile 
phone integrated  learning and that students were 
more likely to initiate mobile learning activities 
than their faculty. 
Conclusion  
It could be concluded  that distance education  
students of the University  of Cape Coast need 
additional learning support that would always be 
available from their course mates and faculty 
members by which their learning needs could be 
addressed anytime, and anywhere. This need 
could be met by incorporating  mobile learning 
in distance education  to close the transactional  
distance among learners and their lecturers. 
Also, because all the students possessed at least 
one mobile device and expressed  willingness to 
participate in mobile learning activities,  if 
mobile learning is incorporated  into distance 
education in Ghana, it will possibly have 
massive acceptance by all the students. 
References  
[1] Amedahe, F. K. (2002). Fundamental s of 
educati onal research  methods. Mimeograph,  UCC, 
Cape Coast, Ghana. 
[2] Becking, D. (2008). How to match mobile 
learning resources  with learners’ current needs: the 
didactic profiling, [online] Available  at 
http://pi1.fernunihagen.de/publikationen/pub2005.ht
ml. 
[3] Brown, T. H. (2005). Towards a model for m-
learning in Africa. International  Journal of 
ELearning , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 299-315, AACE, 
Norfolk, USA. 
[4] Bušelić, M. (2012). Distance learning–concepts 
and contributions.  Oeconomica  Jadertina, 23-31. 
[5] Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Marrison, K. (2005). 
Research method in education  (5th ed.). New York. 
[6] Collins, S., McKinnie s, R. C., & Collins, S. K. 
(2010). Distance learning and how access to 
Education Can Be Improved. Online Journal of 
Workforce  Education  and Development , vol. 4, no. 2, 
1-12. 
9 
 [7] Crescente, M. L., & Lee, D. (2011). Critical 
issues of m learning: design models, adoption 
processes,  and future trends. Journal of the Chinese 
institute of industrial engineers, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 
111-123. DOI: 10.1080/1017 0669.2010.548856 . 
[8] Darling-Hammond,  L., Flook, L., Cook-Harvey, 
C., Barron, B., & Osher, D. (2019). Implications  for 
educational  practice of the science of learning and 
development.  Applied Developmental  Science, 23. 
[9] Economides,  A. A. & Grousopoulou, A. (2010). 
Mobiles in education:  students’ usage, preferences  
and desires. Int. J. Mobile Learning and Organisation,  
4(3), 235-252. 
[10] El-Hussain, M. O., & Cronje, J. C. (2010). 
Defining mobile learning in higher education 
landscape. Educational  Technology  and Society, vol. 
13, no. 3, pp. 12-21. 
[11] Foti, M. K., & Mendez, J. (2014). Mobile 
learning: how students use mobile devices to support 
learning. Journal of literacy and technology , vol. 15, 
no. 3. Available at 
http://www.literacyandtechnology.o rg/uploads/ 1/3/6/
8/136889/jlt_v15_foti.pdf . 
[12] Galusha, J. M. (1997). Barriers to learning in 
distance education . Interpersonal Computing and 
Technology,  vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 6-14. [online] 
Available  at  
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED416377.pdf . 
[13] Garrison R. (2000). Theoretical  challenges  for 
distance education  in the 21st century: A shift from 
structural  to transactional  issues. International  
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
vol. 7, no. 1. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl. v1i1.2. 
[14] Gay, L. R. (1992). Educational research: 
competencies  for analysis and application . (4th ed.) 
New York: Merrill/Macmillan . 
[15] Gibson, C. C., & Graff, A. O. (1992). Impact of 
adults’ preferred learning styles and perception of 
barriers on completion  of external baccalaureate 
degree programme s. International Journal of E-
Learning & Distance Education,  vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 39-
51. [online] Available  at  
http://www.ijede.ca/ind ex.php/jde/article/view/413 /3
03. 
[16] Hagel, P. & Shaw, R. N. (2006). Students’ 
perceptions  of study modes. Distance Education , 
27(3). 283-302. 
[17] Huang, G. (2016). Using mobile phones for 
teaching and learning in Chinese traditional 
undergraduate  education (Doctoral dissertation ). 
Nova Southeaste rn University. [online] Available at NSU Works, College of Engineering  and Computing.  
(983) https://nsuworks.nova.edu/gscis_etd/9 83. 
[18] Hussin, S., Manap, M. R., Amir, Z. and Krish, P. 
(2012). Mobile learning readiness among Malaysian  
students at higher learning institues. Asian Social 
Science, 8(12), 276-283. Available  at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/a ss.v8n12p276 . 
[19] Keegan, D. (2005). The incorporation  of mobile 
learning into mainstream  education  and training. 
mLearn2005: 4th World conference  on m-Learning. 
Cape Town: mLearn2005.  
[20] Kintu, M. J., Zhu, C., & Kagambe,  E. (2017). 
Blended learning effectiveness:  the relationship 
between student characteristics,  design features and 
outcomes.  International  Journal of Educational 
Technology  in Higher Education,  vol. 14, No. 7. 
[21] Kukulska –Hulme, A., & Traxler, J. (2005). 
Mobile learning: A handbook for educators and 
trainers. London: Routledge . 
[22] Larson, A. G., & Owusu-Acheaw, M. (2016). 
Information  needs of distance learners: A case of 
Winneba study center, University  of Education,  
Winneba,  Ghana. Turkish Online Journal of Distance 
Education , vol. 17, no. 3, 62-67. 
[23] Mabawonku,  I. (2004). Library use in distance 
learning: a survey of undergraduates  in three 
Nigerian universities.  African Journal of Library, 
Archives and Information  Science, vol. 14, no. 1, 
151-166. 
[24] Makoe, M. (2013). The pedagogica l suitability 
of using cell phones to support distance education  
students. Open Learning, 114-123. 
[25] Moore, M. G. (1997). Theroy of transactional 
distance. In D. Keegan (Ed.), Theoretical  principles  
of distance education (pp. 22-38). NY: Routlege 
Studies in Distance Education. 
[26] Moore, M. G. (2007). The theory of transactional  
distance. In M. G. Moore (Ed.), Handbook  of 
distance education  (pp. 89-105). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence  Erlbaum Associates.  
[27] Park, Y. (2011). A pedagogical framework  for 
mobile learning: Categorizing educational 
applications  of mobile technologies  into four types. 
International  Review of Research in Open and 
Distance Learning, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 78-102. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.19173/irro dl.v12i2.791 . 
[28] Quin, C. (2001). M-Learning: Mobile, wireless, 
in-your-pocket learning. Line Zine, Fall 2002. 
[online] Available  at 
http://www.linezine .com/2.1/features/cqmmwiyp.htm
l. 
[29] Sharples, M. (2002). Disruptive  devices: mobile 
technology for conversational  learning. International  
10 
 Journal of Continuing  Engineering  Education  and 
Lifelong Learning, vol. 12, no. 5/6, pp. 504-520. 
[online] Available  at 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mike_Sh arples/
publication/2 45528132_Disruptive_De vices_Mobile
_Technology_fo r_Conversational_learning/links/00b
4952cac64c72c7f000000.pdf . 
[30] Sharples, M., Taylor, J., & Vavoula, G. (2007). 
A theory of learning for the mobile age. In Andrews,  
R. & Haythornthwaite , C. (Eds.), The sage handbook 
of e-learning research, (pp. 221–247). London: Sage. 
[31] Singh, R. J. (2012). Current trends in higher 
education  learning and teaching. South African 
Journal of Higher Education , 26(1), 5-9. 
[32] Tatar, D., Roschelle,  J., Vabey, P., & Pennuel, 
W. R. (2003). Handhelds go to school: Lessons learned. The IEEE Computer Society, vol. 36, pp. 30-
37. DOI: 10.1109/MC.2003.1231192 . 
[33] Thorpe, M. (2002) Rethinking  learner support: 
the challenge  of collaborative  online learning, Open 
Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and e-
Learning, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 105-119, DOI: 
10.1080/02680510220146887a . 
[34] Vyas, N., & Nirban, V. S. (2014). Students’ 
perception on the effectiveness  of mobile learning in 
an institutional  context. ELT Research Journal, vol. 
3, no. 1, 26- 36. [online] Available  at 
http://dergipark.org.tr/eltrj/issue/5481/74 444. 
[35] Yousuf, M. (2007). Effectiveness  of mobile 
learning in distance education. Turkish Online 
Journal of Distance Education , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 114-
124. [online] Available  at  
http://dergipar k.org.tr/tojde /issue/16922/176609 . 
 
11