Original Paper
Oper ability , Acceptability , and Usefulness of a Mobile App to Track
Routine Immunization Performance in Rural Pakistan: Interview
Study Among Vaccinators and Key Informants
Shehla Zaidi1,2, MBBS, MSc, PhD; Saqib Ali Shaikh3, MBBS, MSc; Saleem Sayani4, BA, MSc; Abdul Momin Kazi1,
MBBS, MPH; Adeel Khoja5, MBBS, MSc; Syed Shahzad Hussain1, BSN, MSc; Rabia Najmi6, BDS, MSc
1Division of Woman and Child Health, Aga Khan University , Karachi, Pakistan
2Department of Community Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan
3Department of Health, Government of Sindh, Karachi, Pakistan
4E-Health Resource Centre, Aga Khan Development Netw ork, Karachi, Pakistan
5Department of Medicine, Aga Khan University , Karachi, Pakistan
6Department of Community Health Sciences, Aga Khan University , Karachi, Pakistan
Corr esponding Author:
Shehla Zaidi, MBBS, MSc, PhD
Department of Community Health Sciences
Aga Khan University
National Stadium Road
Karachi
Pakistan
Phone: 92 2134864852
Email: shehla.zaidi@aku.edu
Abstr act
Backgr ound: There has been a recent spate of mobile health (mHealth) app use for immunizations and other public health
concerns in low- and middle-income countries. However, recent evidence has largely focused on app development or
before-and-after effects on awareness or service coverage. There is little evidence on the factors that facilitate adoption of mHealth
programs, which is critical to effectively embed digital technology into mainstream health systems.
Objecti ve: This study aimed to provide the qualitati ve experiences of frontline health staff and district managers while engaging
with real-time digital technology to impro ve the coverage of routine childhood immunization in an underserv ed rural district in
Pakistan.
Methods: An Android-based app was iterati vely developed and used for a 2-year period in 11 union councils of the Tando
Muhammad Khan district, an underserv ed rural district with poor immunization coverage in Pakistan. We used iterati ve methods
to examine the (1) acceptability and operability of the app, (2) validity of the collected data, and (3) use of the collected data. In
addition, we collected the barriers and enablers for uptak e of the mHealth app. Each of these topics was further explored related
to changes in work as well as the enabling factors for and barriers to app use. In-depth intervie ws were conducted with the 26
vaccinators posted in the 11 union councils and 7 purposi vely selected key informants (government district managers) involved
with the Expanded Program for Immunization. Findings were triangulated in line with the three broad research areas.
Results: Digital immunization tracking was considered acceptable by vaccinators and district managers. Real-time immunization
data were used to monitor vaccination volume, track children with incomplete vaccinations, develop outreach visit plans, correct
existing microplans, and disburse a fuel allowance for outreach sessions. The validity of the app data was percei ved to be superior
to that of data from manual records. Ease of operability , satisf action with data, personal recognition, links to field support, and
a sense of empo werment served as powerful enablers. Taking twice the time to complete both manual and digital entries and
outdated phones over time were considered constraints. An unintended knock-on effect was impro ved coordination and strengthening
of Expanded Program for Immunization review platforms across district stakeholders through digitalized data.
Conclusions: Embedding digital technology into mainstream health systems relies on use by both end users and district
stakeholders. Ease of operability , satisf action with data reliability , personal recognition, links to field support, and empo werment
are powerful enablers, whereas impro ved coordination as a result of easy, transparent data access can be an important by-product
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 1 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXof digitalization. Findings are relevant not only for wide-scale implementation of immunization tracking apps in Pakistan but
also for informing the use of digital technology for results-based delivery by frontline health workers.
(JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(2):e16081) doi: 10.2196/16081
KEYW ORDS
mHealth; immunization; digital technology; experience; health workers
Introduction
There has been a recent spate of mobile phone–led programs,
known as mobile health (mHealth) [1], to tackle health care
issues such as immunization, tuberculosis (TB), and malaria in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). Mobile phones are
used by 97 per 1000 people in LMICs [2], reaching remote
communities that previously had little interaction with public
authorities or private companies [3]. In rural Tanzania, mobile
technology has been used to provide the current inventory of
anti-malarial medicine to impro ve access to drugs and other
medical supplies [4]. In rural Uganda, an app called TB Detect
enables health care providers to access TB-related educational
material [5]. Another area where mHealth is being increasingly
applied is routine immunization services in LMICs. SMS
reminders about immunization and the use of electronic
registries to trace cases who missed vaccination are being trialed
in an increasing number of LMICs in Latin America and
Sub-Saharan Africa [6-16]. There is some evidence that these
programs impro ve vaccination completion rates [6,8-16].
However, many have not progressed beyond the pilot phase,
and evidence for the effectiveness of digital solutions is limited
[17].
Despite the proliferation of mHealth apps, not all digital health
programs perform as intended, and assessments of the
technology , health systems, and behavioral factors need careful
consideration [18]. In particular , mHealth programs that rely
on the performance of health workers would benef it from
qualitati ve research to understand the extent to which end users
and decision makers are prepared to engage with mHealth
technology [19,20]. Experience from high-income settings
emphasizes a user-centric approach to the development of digital
technology [21]. This is also an important consideration to assess
the implementation of these technologies within LMICs.
Technological factors such as internet access, data volume, and
app usability can affect implementation [22]. In addition, other
factors such as personal motivations for data use, work culture,
and health system support should be reviewed when adopting
mHealth programs.
In Pakistan, 66% of children are completely immunized; this is
much lower than the country target of 90% set by the Global
Vaccine Action Plan [23]. Routine childhood vaccinations are
provided by a dedicated cadre of government-emplo yed
vaccinators at static health centers and during outreach visits
to villages >5 km from the health center . Poor vaccinator
performance, which is exacerbated by poor district supervision,
has been a chronic issue for Pakistan’ s vaccine delivery system.
A minimum of 1 vaccinator is allocated to each union council
(UC), which is the smallest district administrati ve tier with a
population of 10,000-20,000 people. Vaccinators are responsiblefor registering eligible children, providing vaccinations, updating
Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) cards, maintaining
EPI records, and counseling parents for routine immunization
awareness. The vaccinators are supplied with a motorbik e, fuel
support, and vaccines for routine immunization by the EPI
program. UC–based EPI activities are administrati vely
supervised by the district health office. However, paper records
are poorly maintained and have questionable data. In addition,
evidence suggests that vaccinators make too few outreach visits,
provide little routine immunization education for parents, and
maintain poor records [19]. Anecdotal evidence also suggests
that vaccinators are resistant to supervision and often enjoy
political patronage from local legislators protecting them from
accountability on work performance [24]. In 2014, an app to
track vaccinator movements through GPS was introduced across
the populous Punjab province to ensure vaccinators made a
sufficient number of outreach visits. Called e-Vaccs, it was
designed, championed, and implemented by the government
with provincially driven vertical accountability . Since then,
polic y commitment for digital immunization monitoring has
also increased in other provinces, with the aim of effectively
mobilizing the vaccinator workforce and moving away from
relying on questionable paper -based records. However, a lack
of the required systems support has stalled the roll-out process
[20].
In this paper , we report the end-user experiences with a mobile
app (Teeko, Aga Khan University Pediatrics Department,
Pakistan) to track the delivery of routine childhood
immunizations as well as the enablers and barriers for
implementation in local health systems. Teeko is a mobile app
that tracks vaccinators’ routine immunization performance. It
was co-designed with the sub-national government as part of a
larger health system strengthening research program for routine
childhood immunization and piloted in a rural district of Sindh,
Pakistan in 2015-2017. The app generates quality real-time data,
and its key features include GPS tracking of vaccinator outreach
visits, digital records of the immunization volume at the static
health center and during outreach visits, creation of the next
scheduled immunization encounter , and identif ication of children
who missed vaccination. We drew on the experiences of Teeko
usage by vaccinators and district managers, including
acceptability of the app, use of the digitalized data, perceptions
of the data validity , and enabling factors and barriers for its
adoption. We aim to inform how digital technology can be
embedded within district health systems in LMICS.
Methods
Overview
Our study explored the experiences with an Android-based
immunization app to impro ve vaccination coverage in a rural,
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 2 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXdisadv antaged district of Pakistan. The overall objecti ve was
to evaluate the experiences of vaccinators and district managers
during their use of the app to track routine immunization
encounters. The specif ic objecti ves were to determine the
acceptance and operability of the app as a tool for tracking
vaccine encounters within the district health system, assess the
data validity and data-related concerns of stakeholders, and
understand how the technology is being used within the vaccine
delivery system.
Setting
The mHealth initiati ve was part of a larger implementation
research program to strengthen the health system and routine
childhood immunization conducted by the Aga Khan University
(AKU) in collaboration with the provincial EPI in the Tando
Muhammad Khan (TMK) district in Sindh Province in
2015-2017 (Figure 1). This district had poor vaccinationperformance, with a Penta coverage rate of only 23% and PCV
coverage of only 11% at the start of the study . A package of
integrated interv entions including a digital app was implemented
based on formati ve research to identify interv entions that was
conducted at the start of the study . In addition to the mHealth
interv ention, other complementary interv entions included
facilitation of a district EPI review platform, microplanning
training, fuel support routed through the district health office
for outreach activities, and co-financing of EPI motorbik es for
UCs lacking functional bikes for outreach sessions. Interv entions
were implemented in 2 district sub-di visions (Talukas)
comprised of 11 UCs. The Teeko interv ention was implemented
over 24 months, after which vaccinator and district stakeholder
intervie ws were conducted. The immunization program resulted
in a signif icantly higher number of completed vaccinations at
the interv ention sites than at the control sites, as measured in
terms of PENT A3 and PCV3 coverage (Table 1).
Figur e 1. Map of the Tando Muhammad Khan (TMK) district in Sindh province, Pakistan, including locations of union councils (UCs) and Expanded
Program on Immunization (EPI) centers.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 3 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 1. Impro vement in the vaccine coverage rate from 2014 to 2017 during the Health Systems Strengthening (HSS) immunization pilot study [19].
Pvalue Difference, % Control, % Interv ention, % Vaccine
PCV3
.001 20 19 11 2014
— — 32 44 2017  
PENT A3
.001 20 31 23 2014
— — 32 44 2017  
mHealth Inter vention
Vaccinators and their sub-district and district EPI supervisors
were provided with smartphones to track the immunization
encounters. The app contained a list of UCs, villages, and health
facilities assigned to each vaccinator . Vaccinators could access
the app via unique access numbers to enter immunization datafor the villages listed in their UCs (Figure 2). The app track ed
vaccinator visits, vaccination volume at the static health center
and outreach points, identif ied children that had missed a
vaccination, track ed vaccine availability , and provided
communication features for parents. The app had two
components: data entry and a Web portal for data visualization.
Figur e 2. Vaccinator using the Teeko app.
The immunization app was developed over a 6-month field
testing period in 2014-2015 and was implemented in 2015-2017.
The principal investigator (SZ) conducted a baseline assessment
of routine immunization delivery in the district and identif ied
the reporting of incomplete, questionable immunization EPI
data and poor use in the TMK district [19]. During the
assessment, management information system records were
reviewed, and EPI officials, vaccinators, health workers, and
health facility managers were intervie wed. Further follow-upmeetings were held with EPI provincial staff, the district health
team, and vaccinators by the principal investig ator (SZ) and a
research specialist (SH) to identify interv ention points within
the EPI record flow that could be supported with an
immunization tracking app, the support required for vaccinators
and district health officers to use the app, and the health system
interv entions required to facilitate decision making. An in-house
technology firm (Aga Khan Development e-Resource Centre)
was contracted for digital programming. App design and
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 4 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXdevelopment were overseen by a steering committee chaired
by the Provincial Director General of Health and comprised of
the study principal investig ator (SZ), a research specialist (SH),
UNICEF , WHO, the EPI focal person for the TMK district, the
District Health Officer for TMK, and a representati ve from the
technology firm (SS). Using a participatory process, the
following app features were identif ied: compulsory photo
identif ication; defaulter (children who missed a vaccination)
status using traffic light colors; alignment with EPI’s
management information system; client data to include the
parents’ national ID card numbers, household number , and
village details; and adjustment for community migration.
Meetings were held during the design phase and continued into
the app roll-out, with recorded minutes. Iterations included the
addition of new vaccines, identif ication of areas of misreporting,
adjustment for vaccinations recei ved outside the study area, and
adjustment for household migration. To impro ve the
technological features, the study team and technology partner
field-tested different versions of the app with vaccinators and
the district EPI focal person. Due to poor internet connecti vity,
the ability to upload data offline was added after the field testing.
SMS messaging was poorly recei ved and replaced with a roboticcall. The study team randomly check ed the photo entries and
uploaded data for errors.
Finally , the app features included registration, immunization
encounter record, offline data mode, vaccine stock management,
awareness content, text messaging, a central database, and a
Web portal.
Registration
The vaccinator registered the child at the first encounter ,
entering the child’ s father’ s name, child’ s date of birth,
household phone number , village name, and UC (Figure 2).
This created an individual profile for the child. The child
registration form was the same as the manually completed EPI
child registration form. The data for the registered child was
synced with the central database, in which all data were stored.
Immunization Encounter Record
The vaccinator then vaccinated the child and uploaded a
mandatory photo of the vaccination or updated EPI card (Figure
3) as proof of vaccination. A GPS-based location was generated
for the vaccination site. The app sent the immunization record
data to the central server in real time.
Figur e 3. Examples of registration, an immunization record, and the image capture view on the Teeko app.
Offline Data Mode
The app’s offline feature allowed vaccination data to be recorded
when internet connecti vity was not available. The records were
stored locally in the app and uploaded once an internet
connection was restored during the outreach visit or at the health
facility . Vaccinations could occur within the health facility or
during an outreach visit.Vaccine Inventory Management
To track inventory and ensure timely pick up of required supply ,
vaccinators could enter the amount of vaccine they had with
them as well as the inventory at their respecti ve health facilities.
Awareness Content
The app had certain communication features. A 60-second
awareness video on routine immunization could be played by
the vaccinator to educate the parents during a vaccination
encounter .
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 5 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXText Messaging
Following the vaccination, robotic calls and SMS messages
about the routine immunization schedule and next visit were
sent to the caregivers of each registered child.
Central Database
The central system (Figure 4) allowed the administrator to
register all users (vaccinators, lady health workers, and viewers).In addition to during the vaccination encounters, the app
occasionally sent the GPS coordinates of the vaccinators to the
central database (Figure 5). If internet connecti vity was not
available, the coordinates were stored in the local database and
later uploaded to the central database. The vaccinator directory
listed the UC assigned to each vaccinator .
Figur e 4. Flow of data through the Teeko app and Web portal.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 6 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 5. Vaccinator tracking screen in the Teeko Web portal.
Web Portal
Through the Web portal, the management and supervisory staff
remotely monitored vaccinators’ activities and movements in
real time (Figure 5). The SMS Panel allowed the administrator
to send an SMS to the vaccinators and lady health workers about
meetings, schedules, and data corrections. The portal also
generated district and UC reports on routine immunization
coverage, defaulters, and individual vaccinator performance.These reports were generated based on formats already in use
by the EPI Program.
Data Collection
We conducted semi-structured intervie ws with vaccinators and
key informants (district managers) involved with EPI delivery
(See Table 2). Data were collected and analyzed by trained
researchers.
Table 2. Themes and tools used to explore the user experiences with digitalized immunization tracking and the key enabling factors
Tools Themes
Key-informant intervie ws with district stakeholders In-depth intervie ws with vaccinators
Acceptability of the app within the district health system,
enabling factors, and constraining factorsUse of key app features and app operability Acceptability and operability of
the app
Perceptions of and concerns with the data validity Perceptions of and concerns with the data validity Validity of the app data
Engaging with the app data, enabling factors, and con-
straining factorsEngaging with the app data, enabling factors, and con-
straining factorsUse of the app data
Vaccinator Interviews
Semi-structured intervie ws were conducted covering the
following topics: frequenc y of use of the app features;
operability of and issues using the digital app; perceptions of
the data validity and comparison with that of manually collected
data; engagement with the app; and enabling factors and barriersfor data use. Intervie ws were conducted with all 26 vaccinators
working in the 11 UCs in which the digital app was
implemented. All the vaccinators used the immunization app
for at least 24 months. Individual intervie ws were conducted
with each vaccinator in the local language and the privacy of a
separate room.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 7 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXDistrict Stakeholder Interviews
In-depth intervie ws with key informants (district stakeholders)
included the following topics: acceptability of the app to track
immunizations conducted by the district heath team, perception
of the data validity , and use of the information by district health
management. For each topic, we also asked about how their
work had changed after using the app and the enabling factors
and barriers for app use. The topic guide was written in English
and translated into the local Sindhi language. Intervie ws lasted
45 to 60 minutes and were conducted in the local language.
Stakeholders from the district administration and district health
office were purposi vely selected based on their key roles in EPI
oversight or delivery. A total of 7 district stakeholders were
intervie wed, including the Deputy Commissioner (administrati ve
head of the district and chair of the Polio-EPI district
committee), Assistant Deputy Commissioner , District Health
Officer, Assistant District Health Officer, District EPI Focal
Person, District Superintendent of Vaccination, and Coordinator
of the Lady Health Worker Program (rural community-based
female health workers that assist with the awareness provision
for routine immunization and mobilization of households for
routine immunization sessions provided by vaccinators).
Ethical Considerations
Ethical appro val for the study was obtained from the Ethical
Review Committee of Aga Khan University Karachi, Pakistan
(ERC number: 2818-Ped-ERC-13). Informed consent was
obtained from all participants. Intervie ws were conducted on a
voluntary basis. Each participant was ensured of the
confidentiality of personal information. Personal information
was anon ymized for analyses and reporting through a coded
intervie wee number . The recorded data were kept in locked
drawers and encrypted laptops to ensure data confidentiality .
Data Analysis
The intervie w information was transcribed in Sindhi and
translated back into English. These were then check ed for errors
and manually analyzed. Three a priori themes were identif ied
in line with the research objecti ves and used as the basis for
inducti ve analysis: acceptability and operability of the app, data
validity , and use of the app data (Table 2). Content analysis of
the transcripts was undertak en, developing main codes in line
with the a priori themes and further detailed coding based on
grounded findings emer ging from the narrati ve.
Results
Intervie w guides were used to report the results from the
in-depth intervie ws. Textbox es 1and 2highlight the important
findings from the vaccinator and district management intervie ws,
respecti vely.
Vaccinators’ End-User Experience
Table 3lists specif ic responses provided by vaccinators during
their intervie ws.Acceptability of the App
Use of App Featur es
All 26 vaccinators used the app to record their vaccination
encounters. Nearly all vaccinators (n=24) took post-v accination
photos of the children. Although some parents initially refused
the photos, they eventually agreed after the vaccinators
explained that the photo would be used for immunization
verification and recording. Only two vaccinators reported that
parents would not allow a photo under any circumstances, in
which case a photo of the vaccination card was uploaded instead.
These vaccinators were assigned to UCs that had pock ets of the
population with reports of prior vaccine refusal.
All the app features for routine immunization awareness
including the awareness video, SMS alerts, and robotic calls
were used by 18 vaccinators. Only the awareness videos were
used by 6 vaccinators, and 2 vaccinators used only the SMS
alert and robotic call features.
Operability
Of the 26 vaccinators, 25 reported that the app was easy to use
and they could operate it without difficulty (Table 3). One
vaccinator , who had a strok e-induced disability , needed his
son’s help to enter the data in the app. However, he also required
assistance to manually complete data entry . Real-time data
display in the format of the government EPI report was
considered helpful for reading and relating to the data.
Vaccinators reported no instances of data loss from the app.
Internet connecti vity issues often occurred in the more remote
villages, but the app allowed offline data entry . Then,
vaccinators uploaded the data after they returned to the facility .
The offline feature was particularly appreciated for its ability
to prevent data loss (see Figure 4).
However, a few vaccinators reported being uncomfortable using
the offline option and would have preferred real-time
information uploads to the central database. Their reported
concern was they might forget to upload pending data or be
unable to upload pending data if the phone was damaged or
stolen. However, there were no reports of phone damage or loss
during the study .
Another reported issue was that, as the phones aged over the
24-month period, the phones would hang or freeze while using
the app, making it difficult to enter data. Often, the phone had
to be restarted, and there was a concern that unsaved data would
be lost. The vaccinators wanted a replacement phone at least
every 2 years to continue using the app.
Validity of the App Data
Most of the vaccinators (n=23) reported a high likelihood of
error with manual documentation of outreach vaccination
encounters. In practice, the data were entered based on recall
in the EPI registers at the health care facilities rather than on
site. Vaccinators recounted poorly recorded field data during
prior measles outbreaks (before the Teeko app was available),
resulting in an inability to target defaulters. They percei ved that
instant data entry through a mobile app generated a more
accurate defaulter list.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 8 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTextbox 1. Important findings from the vaccinator intervie ws.
Acceptability of the App: Use of App Featur es
• All vaccinators used the app for vaccination encounters.
• Photos of the immunized child were uploaded more frequently than photos of the vaccination card.
• Most vaccinators used the videos, SMS, and robotic calls for immunization awareness education and routine follow-ups.
• Some vaccinators used only the videos for immunization awareness education.
Acceptability of the App: Operability
• Vaccinators considered it easy to operate.
• They could upload the data in villages without waiting for internet connecti vity.
• The vaccinators preferred using the app over manual data entry .
• Issues included hanging of the phones after 2 years.
Validity of the App Data: Perceptions of Data Validity
• The vaccinators belie ved the accurac y of child registration and vaccination status was better than that of manual records.
• The photo verification was considered a key feature for accurac y.
• The vaccinators felt as if they were more likely to follow the monthly plan for visits because their supervisors monitored them via GPS tracking.
Validity of the App Data: Engagement With the Data
• Vaccinators could proacti vely identify and track defaulters.
• They could develop a monthly visit plan that could particularly target defaulters.
• Their performance could be track ed accurately by their supervisors using GPS tracking.
Use of the App Data: Enabling Factors
• Reporting of individual performance resulted in supervisory recognition and personal gratif ication in reaching targets.
Use of the App Data: Barriers
• Data entry via both the app and manual methods resulted in double the amount of work.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 9 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTextbox 2. Important findings from the key informant intervie ws with district management.
Acceptability of the App: Acceptability Within the District Health System
• The vaccinators were comfortable using the app.
• The Expanded Program for Immunization (EPI) supervisors found it easy to retrie ve the data to monitor vaccinators and identify defaulters.
• The key informants requested to continue using the app and expand its use to other districts.
• The district was able to act as an example for other districts.
Acceptability of the App: Enabling Factors
• The district managers were interested in the app and expressed ownership of it.
• Data-dri ven accountability led to coordination across health programs and with the district administration.
• Data-dri ven accountability resulted in a demand for work recognition as well as fear of exposure.
Acceptability of the App: Barriers
• Additional effort to increase awareness of routine immunization was needed in high-def aulter areas.
Validity of the App Data: Perceptions of Data Validity
• GPS location of vaccinators provided reliable information, while previously checks were onerous.
• Vaccination volume and child details were very accurate and could be quickly verified.
Validity of the App Data: Engagement With the Data
• Real-time data was used to inform EPI monthly review meetings about the increasing vaccination volume and reduced number of defaulters.
• The monthly recognition of high-performing vaccinators and naming the poorly performing vaccinators encouraged sharing of experiences.
Use of the App Data: Enabling Factors
• The data enabled coordination across the district stakeholders.
• The individualized public recognition was considered the biggest motivator.
• The data encouraged competition among the vaccinators as well as sharing of lessons learned.
• The app data were used to release mobility support.
Use of the App Data: Barriers
• Political patronage is still an issue but better managed due to transparenc y of accountability and monitoring of the vaccinators in the target setting.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 10 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 3. Specif ic responses from the vaccinator intervie ws, organized by theme.
Examples of vaccinator responses Theme
“It is very easy to use, just like my own phone that I use, typing information on the phone is easy too... and we already
knew how to take a picture and upload it...”Acceptability of the app:
Operability
“I never lose any of the data now, as the data is entered then and there in the outreach, ...first we used to write it on a
piece of paper and bring it home and then enter it the next day at the health facility ...there was a huge chance of error ...
“Teeko” data is very reliable data”
“The application can save my data until I get internet signals but still, to avoid error due to this in future, a better con-
necti vity in remote areas is needed... ”
“It’s been two years now, mobiles phones should be replaced with new ones, ... they hang and shut down at times...
Taking more time to make an entry in the field or transfer the data... ”
“It is easy for me to find children who are overdue for their vaccination, I can see the due date for the next vaccination
and reach the child”Validity of the app data
“The district administration has become more watchful and alert now... they can catch us not being in the field through
their mobiles. now I belie ve that I am performing my duty with more honestly than I used to previously ...”Use of the app data
“During the last award ceremon y, I was awarded first position by district-AKU team; my data recorded on “Teeko”
application in the field also completely matched the manual data...I was overwhelmed”
“I have been working for the last 35 years as a vaccinator and I feel that these two years were the ones where I performed
my best. I feel very proud of myself”
“Very easy application, but with manual (entry of records), it doubles my work; we have to make entries in both EPI
(paper) registers and “Teeko”; this takes a lot of time”
The post-v accination photograph was considered key to ensuring
reliable data. Compared with the prior practice of checking the
EPI records, the advantage of the photo feature was child
verification. Vaccinators also reported that the GPS tracking of
outreach visits resulted in greater vaccinator vigilance in
conducting outreach sessions and impro ved the reliability of
vaccination encounter reports. Vaccinators reported calls from
their supervisors to check their location when the supervisors
did not observ e any field activity.
Use of the App Data
All vaccinators reported they mainly used the digital data to
identify children overdue for their vaccinations. Vaccinators
expressed ownership of the data and a feeling of empo werment
when using the data to plan their monthly vaccination rounds.
They also reported using the data to set target vaccination
volumes.
All vaccinators also mentioned the use of the GPS feature by
the district health office and deputy commissioner for vaccinator
supervision. Vaccinators reported being questioned by the
district supervisors if they turned off their mobile location or
could not be seen moving in the field.
The vaccinators reported that the overriding motivator to use
the app was the reporting of the performance level of each
vaccinator . The vaccinators reported feeling gratif ied when the
best performing vaccinators were publicly recognized during
the review of individual performance levels in the monthly EPI
meetings. All the vaccinators found it very satisfying to be
noticed and praised by superior EPI officials and district officers.Most of the vaccinators reported that this motivated them to do
their best. Others reported this was the first time they took their
work seriously and found it a novel but satisfying experience
to work toward targets rather than working to identify loopholes
to avoid work.
A few vaccinators reported that the app increased their workload
because they were also expected to manually document the EPI
records in addition to documenting via the app.
Migration to digital records from manual recording was
preferred by 23 of the 26 vaccinators, while 3 vaccinators
wanted both manual and digital record keeping. All 26
vaccinators were willing to continue using the app in the future.
The vaccinators also mentioned the conditional fuel support
provided by the district health office based on the number of
monthly visits reported by the app. The vaccinators reported
that the lack of fuel support made it difficult to conduct outreach
sessions.
District Stak eholder Experiences
Findings from the key informant intervie ws with district
stakeholders were categorized into the following thematic areas:
acceptability of the app for routine immunization supervision
by the district heath team, perception of data validity , and use
of the app information by the district health management. Within
each thematic area, the narrati ve reports were analyzed for
changes in work after using the app, experiences with
implementing the app, and the enabling factors for and barriers
to app use. Table 4lists specif ic responses provided by the
district stakeholders during their intervie ws.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 11 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 4. Specif ic responses from the district stakeholder intervie ws, organized by theme.
Examples of district stakeholder responses Theme
“Good coordination between the Health and District Administration is seen, District Health Office helped AKU to pilot
and develop “Teeko” while the Deputy Commissioner Office supported in making their planning work, also did field
monitoring and addressing administrati ve issues”Acceptability of the app
“Commissioner (district) requested to start the same project in his district, we were called to give a briefing on “Teeko”
he was very impressed... ”
“Under the Health Department, EPI Provincial Program should adopt “Teeko” immediately ...at least in the districts
which are not performing up to mark”
“At first we used to follow vaccinators schedule, get hold of someone who knew the area, then try to find him in the
field, now we see his location in “Teeko” application and reach him...it really saves a lot of time”Validity of the app data
“On looking at the data I send direction to vaccinators through “Teeko” (ap-plication) to correct it...the y reply after
getting it done”
“If we took any disciplinary action against irregular or poor performing vaccinators, we faced political pressure at times
and are threatened too, we then become helpless... ”Use of the app data
“Political involvement has always been an issue, but with sincere working, like with this “Teeko” project, we can
overcome it.”
“At the office of Deputy Commissioner , in a formal ceremon y with heads from the Teeko project and District Health
Officer the best performing vaccinators were appreciated, they were given certif icates, shields and gifts...e veryone
wanted to do more to earn this honor and respect...some of the vaccinators were so motivated that they even worked
on Sundays to meet their target”
“The vaccinator’ s data is assessed in the EPI meeting for future decisions & micro planning. ”
“The vaccinators were offered motorc ycles, they had to pay 50% while the project paid another 50%, it not only solved
mobility issue, they owned a motorc ycle as well...e very month they (Vaccinators) get POL from District Health Of-
fice...the accountability made possible regular POL supply to vaccinators, which previously was not provided. ”
“With mobility support and real monitoring, the routine immunization has impro ved in the outreach”
Acceptability of the App
Key informants from district management commonly reported
that the vaccinators were comfortable using the app. District
officials found it easy to retrie ve routine immunization volume
from their cell phones and computers, and the officials used the
app to keep track of children who missed immunizations. The
intervie wees recounted poor vaccinator performance prior to
using the app and attrib uted this to poor work attitudes,
insuf ficient supervision from the supervisors, and a lack of fuel
support and functional motorbik es for supervisory visits.
The stakeholders reported that the app led to increased
coordination between the EPI and Lady Health Worker
Program—the two important community outreach resources
within the district heath system—and closer interaction
regarding routine immunization between the District Health
Office and the Deputy Commissioner’ s Office.
The health officials expressed an eagerness to continue the
tracking initiati ve and anxiety that routine immunization
coverage would decline again after closure of the project. The
stakeholders also requested that the project be expanded to the
other sub-di visions within the district. The district leadership
reported feeling as if they could serve as an example for other
districts in the province and were gratif ied that other districts
requested demonstrations and sharing of lessons learned.
Validity of the App Data
Key informants reported that tracking a vaccinator in the field
was challenging in routine practice. Immunization work plansprovided by the vaccinators were not always accurate; they
could make changes to the plans without prior notice to the
district health office. Moreo ver, even when EPI supervisors
verified the vaccinators’ locations in the field, they needed
assistance from local villagers familiar with the area. It was still
possible that they would not successfully find the vaccinator .
The district stakeholders appreciated that the app facilitated
vaccinator tracking through its GPS feature. They were able to
locate and reach vaccinators without delay .
The EPI district supervisors reported that they relied on the app
data to provide supervisory instructions for the vaccinators
related to routine immunization coverage and defaulter reports.
The app data were considered superior in quality to manually
collected data and were particularly used for correcti ve actions.
Use of the App Data
The key informants commonly reported that the main uses of
the app data were impro ving the number of routine
immunization encounters and locating defaulting children. In
the past, it was challenging to hold the vaccinator cadre
accountable for routine immunization performance, making it
difficult to impro ve vaccination volume. Furthermore,
disciplinary actions such as a “notice of explanation, ” for which
emplo yees must provide an explanation for an allegation of
violation of compan y policies, rules, and procedures; “show
cause letter ,” which asks the emplo yee to provide a reason why
they should not face a disciplinary action for a conduct or
capacity issue in the workplace; and termination of irregular ,
ghosting, or nonperforming vaccinators were not effective due
to the political patronage of vaccinators by local legislators.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 12 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXThe key informants mentioned that regular EPI review meetings
were convened at the district health office, and the meetings
used the real-time app data. These meetings were often attended
by the district health commissioner and assistant commissioner .
During these meetings, vaccinator performance was reviewed,
including that of poor performers. Vaccinators with high
performance were also recognized separately in quarterly public
ceremonies attended by district legislators. The stakeholders
reported that the public recognition was instrumental for
increasing motivation. They added that the review meetings
provided a platform for vaccinators to learn from each other’ s
experiences and promote health y competition.
District stakeholders also expressed a sense of empo werment
from using the app to make operational decisions to impro ve
routine immunization in the district. They used the data to direct
activities to areas with incomplete vaccination coverage.
Real-time immunization data were also used to provide support
for vaccinator mobility based on GPS-v erified outreach visits.
Additionally , EPI motorbik es were provided by the district
health office to the better performing vaccinators; these were
co-financed by the project and the vaccinator . Both activities
were undertak en during the monthly district EPI review
meetings that were chaired by the District Health Officer.
Discussion
In LMICS, mHealth apps are increasingly used for
immunizations and other public health concerns; however, recent
evidence has largely focused on app development, dashboards,
or the before-and-after effects on awareness or coverage
[6,7,10,12,21-25]. Less evidence is available regarding end
users’ and decision makers’acceptance of and engagement with
digital health technology . Bridging this evidence gap is critical
to embed digital technology into mainstream health systems.
In this paper , we report the qualitati ve experiences of frontline
health staff and district managers in engaging with real-time,
digital technology to impro ve the coverage of routine childhood
immunization in an underserv ed rural district in Pakistan.
Using an iterati ve approach, we gathered information about the
acceptability of the app for data collection and tracking vaccine
delivery, perceptions about data validity , the extent that app
data were used, and the engagement of care. We also identif ied
the key factors for frontline staff to engage with digital
technology . The app was commonly accepted by vaccinators
and district supervisors to track vaccination encounters;
however, the app features aimed at increasing parents’
vaccination awareness were less commonly used. Lack of
parental agreement for photograph verification of their children
was not a major issue. Vaccinators found the app easy to operate,
the fields were similar to those of EPI records, and the offline
data recording feature was helpful in remote access areas.
Double entry of both manual and digital records was considered
time consuming, and aging phone technology created systems
issues. District supervisors found the app data easy to access
for quick verification of immunization activity and to provide
supervisory direction. The ability for real-time tracking of both
individual vaccinators and the entire team through the Web
portal considerably reduced the time spent tracking vaccinatorsduring outreach visits. This helped to not only accurately track
the vaccinator but also identify vaccination coverage according
to the geographical location. This drastically reduced the
monitoring and tracking time during outreach. The increased
availability of supervision time was then utilized for other
monitoring and evaluation activities. In addition, the
app-generated maps helped to finalize microplans and identify
missed locations. The validity of the app data was considered
superior to that of data from manual records by both the
vaccinators and district supervisors; this perception was
attrib uted to photo verification of the encounters. Opinions
differed regarding what contrib uted to the impro ved data. The
EPI supervisors attrib uted it to the transparenc y of vaccinator
movements, while vaccinators felt that the ability to record
immunization entries during the visits was better than using
recall to manually record data later at the health facilities.
Real-time immunization data were mainly used to monitor
vaccination volume, track children with incomplete vaccinations,
develop outreach visit plans, alter existing microplans, and
provide a results-based fuel allowance. A signif icant outcome
was the initiation of regular monthly EPI review meetings by
the district leadership. During these meetings, real-time data
were used to review immunization progress. Data were also
used to recognize both good and poor immunization
performance per individual and across UCs and vaccinators.
These findings are supported by those from a study in Nigeria
that used GPS and geospatial data to track vaccinators [26,27].
They reported impro vements in microplanning, monitoring, and
immunization coverage, which were attrib uted to the
technology-based support for performance monitoring that
reduced erroneous entries and data fabrication by vaccinators.
They also used GPS data to provide feedback to the outreach
team and target missed geographical areas.
Our study also identif ied enablers that facilitated the use of
digital immunization tracking. Recognition of individual
performance, empo werment, and results linked to fuel support
emer ged as powerful motivators for the vaccinators to work
towards target delivery rather than avoiding workload, as they
had previously . For district management, key enablers included
a sense of empo werment for reviewing and planning EPI
delivery and enhanced transparenc y to counteract political
patronage of vaccinators. A knock-on effect of the real-time
verification data was impro ved coordination across different
components of the district health systems.
Reviews of digital technology use in other settings have drawn
on mixed methods including intervie ws, focus group discussions,
and systems analysis of the app data. The evidence indicates
that instant data availability for monitoring purposes, as
observ ed with neglected tropical diseases [28], and ease of use
and digital literac y of end users, as observ ed with oral cholera
vaccinations [29], are important parameters for the successful
trialing of digital apps. Poorly designed devices and inadequate
cellular infrastructure have been noted as barriers for integrating
apps into health systems [30]. Lessons learned from
immunization registries in Latin American and Caribbean
countries indicate that digitalization must be useful to
vaccinators for the data to be of good quality . Evidence on
non-technological factors for health provider apps is still
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 13 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXemer ging. A study of a client data app for community health
nurses in Ghana resulted in reasonably good acceptability due
to the app’s capacity to facilitate client follow-up and data
reporting; however, the feasibility and usability of the app were
hindered by high client volumes, staff shortages, and softw are
and device challenges [31]. A study on an mHealth app for
midwi ves in Ghana found low levels of user acceptance and a
softw are design that did not match the end‐user needs or work
environment [32]. Another study that introduced an app for
community health volunteers in Kenya found that acceptability
impro ved after a period of initial anxiety; however, there were
feasibility challenges related to battery drainage and difficulty
keeping the phone charged [33]. Yet another study in South
Africa with an app for mHealth workers to electronically track
patients with multi-drug resistant TB found a high intent for
use but low actual usage resulting from forgetfulness and low
levels of responsibility for such work [34].
Our study provides timely evidence on the successful integration
of an immunization tracking app to be used by vaccinators as
Pakistan prepares to upscale digitalized immunization tracking.
It also provides lessons for LMICS on technological and
non-technological factors that require attention to conte xtualize
health provider apps within the local health system. We contend
that immunization performance tracking through digital
technology needs essential acceptance by frontline health force,
and mere vertical enforcement is not enough. Technological
ease of operability , personal recognition, results-oriented
mobility support, and empo werment to impro vise microplanning
are powerful individual-le vel factors, whereas data transparenc y
and empo werment for district planning are key
organizational-le vel enablers to embed digital tracking in
vaccine delivery systems. While there is a proliferation of digital
technologies in countries such as Pakistan, dedicated investment
in e-governance for continuous, independent, rigorous evaluation
is required to assess actual use in the field and validity of the
data.Strengths and Limitations
This study used iterati ve qualitati ve research methods for
in-depth exploration of the digital technology interf ace with
end users and decision makers within the health system. This
iterati ve approach helped identify themes in an unexplored area
and identif ied details that would have been missed in a more
prescripti ve quantitati ve study . Triangulation of the findings
across vaccinators, supervisors, and district managers
strengthened the analysis and helped draw out common
convincing narrati ves. To limit bias, researchers who were not
part of the interv ention team undertook tool development and
data collection.
A limitation of this study is the lack of quantitati ve assessment
of the data generated by the app. A household vaccination
coverage survey conducted as part of the larger health system
strengthening immunization study found a signif icant difference
in vaccination completion rates between the baseline and end
timepoints across study control and interv ention areas [35].
However, the app’s impact cannot be separately quantif ied from
the other components of the larger health systems interv ention
package. While several of the findings are specif ic to the study
conte xt, the study provides the key parameters for consideration
during the current rollout of digital immunization interv entions
in Pakistan as well as lessons for the introduction of a health
provider app in LMICS. Digital technology investments must
be accompanied by independent rigorous evaluation for
relevance to health systems.
Conclusions
Embedding digital technology into mainstream health systems
relies on acceptance by both end users and district stakeholders.
Ease of operability , satisf action with reliable data, personal
recognition, results-based field support, and empo werment are
powerful enablers. An important by-product of digitalization
can be impro ved coordination as a result of transparent, easy
data access. The findings are relevant to not only the current
upscaling of digital technology to track immunization in
Pakistan but also the application of digital technology for
results-based delivery by frontline health workers.
Ackno wledgments
We thank Dr Hassan Murad Shah Director General Health Sindh; Zahoor Baloch, EPI Programme Sindh; Dr Nazir Baloch,
Department of Health Sindh,; Dr Hafeez, Pasha District Health Office, Tando Muhammad Khan; Agha Abdul Rahim, DCO,
Tando Muhammad Khan; Abdul Muqeet; and Tehniat Sheikh, Aga Khan Development Netw ork E-Health Resource Centre. This
work was supported by GAVI-The Vaccine Alliance (PP33961213A1).
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Refer ences
1. World Health Organization. Decade of Vaccines―Global Vaccine Action Plan 2011-2020 URL: https://www .who.int/
immunization/global_v accine_action_plan/DoV_GV AP_2012_2020/en/ [accessed 2020-01-10]
2. USAID. 2003 Oct. Immunization Essentials: A Practical Field Guide URL: http://pdf.usaid.go v/pdf_docs/Pnacu960.pdf
[accessed 2020-01-10]
3. Stansf ield SK, Walsh J, Prata N, Evans T. Chapter 54: Information to Impro ve Decision Making for Health. In: Jamison
DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, Alleyne G, Claeson M, Evans DB, editors. Disease control priorities in developing countries.
New York, NY: The World Bank and Oxford University Press; 2006:1022.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 14 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX4. Barrington J, Wereko-Brobby O, Ward P, Mwafongo W, Kungul we S. SMS for Life: a pilot project to impro ve anti-malarial
drug supply management in rural Tanzania using standard technology . Malar J 2010 Oct 27;9:298 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/1475-2875-9-298 ] [Medline: 20979633 ]
5. Labrique AB, Vasude van L, Kochi E, Fabricant R, Mehl G. mHealth innovations as health system strengthening tools: 12
common applications and a visual frame work. Glob Health Sci Pract 2013 Aug;1(2):160-171 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.9745/GHSP-D-13-00031 ] [Medline: 25276529 ]
6. Bangure D, Chirundu D, Gombe N, Marufu T, Mandozana G, Tshimang a M, et al. Effectiveness of short message services
reminder on childhood immunization programme in Kadoma, Zimbabwe - a randomized controlled trial, 2013. BMC Public
Health 2015 Feb 12;15:137 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-1470-6 ] [Medline: 25885862 ]
7. Domek GJ, Contreras-Roldan IL, O'Leary ST, Bull S, Furniss A, Kempe A, et al. SMS text message reminders to impro ve
infant vaccination coverage in Guatemala: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Vaccine 2016 May 5;34(21):2437-2443
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2016.03.065 ] [Medline: 27026145 ]
8. Haji A, Lowther S, Ngan'ga Z, Gura Z, Tabu C, Sandhu H, et al. Reducing routine vaccination dropout rates: evaluating
two interv entions in three Kenyan districts, 2014. BMC Public Health 2016 Feb 16;16:152 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12889-016-2823-5 ] [Medline: 26880141 ]
9. Kaewkungw al J, Singhasi vanon P, Khamsiriw atchara A, Sawang S, Meankae w P, Wechsart A. Application of smart phone
in "Better Border Healthcare Program": a module for mother and child care. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2010 Nov
03;10:69 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-10-69 ] [Medline: 21047412 ]
10. Kazi A, Murtaza A, Kazi A, Khurram Z, Hussain K. Effect of mobile phone text messages reminders on uptak e of routine
immunization among children in Pakistan-study protocol for a randomized clinical trial. J Vaccines Vaccin 2016;7(333):2.
[Medline: 29514773 ]
11. Kazi AM, Ali M, Zubair K, Kalimuddin H, Kazi AN, Iqbal SP, et al. Effect of Mobile Phone Text Message Reminders on
Routine Immunization Uptak e in Pakistan: Randomized Controlled Trial. JMIR Public Health Surveill 2018 Mar 07;4(1):e20
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/publichealth.7026 ] [Medline: 29514773 ]
12. Lund S, Nielsen BB, Hemed M, Boas IM, Said A, Said K, et al. Mobile phones impro ve antenatal care attendance in
Zanzibar: a cluster randomized controlled trial. BMC Pregnanc y Childbirth 2014 Jan 17;14:29 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/1471-2393-14-29 ] [Medline: 24438517 ]
13. Nguyen NT, Vu HM, Dao SD, Tran HT, Nguyen TXC. Digital immunization registry: evidence for the impact of mHealth
on enhancing the immunization system and impro ving immunization coverage for children under one year old in Vietnam.
Mhealth 2017;3:26 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2017.06.03 ] [Medline: 28828373 ]
14. Schlumber ger M, Bamok o A, Yaméogo TM, Rouv et F, Ouedraogo R, Traoré B, et al. [Positi ve impact on the Expanded
Program on Immunization when sending call-back SMS through a Computerized Immunization Register , Bobo Dioulasso
(Burkina Faso)]. Bull Soc Pathol Exot 2015 Dec;108(5):349-354. [doi: 10.1007/s13149-015-0455-4 ] [Medline: 26498331 ]
15. Uddin MJ, Shamsuzzaman M, Horng L, Labrique A, Vasude van L, Zeller K, et al. Use of mobile phones for impro ving
vaccination coverage among children living in rural hard-to-reach areas and urban streets of Bangladesh. Vaccine 2016
Jan 4;34(2):276-283. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2015.11.024 ] [Medline: 26647290 ]
16. Wakadha H, Chandir S, Were EV, Rubin A, Obor D, Levine OS, et al. The feasibility of using mobile-phone based SMS
reminders and conditional cash transfers to impro ve timely immunization in rural Kenya. Vaccine 2013 Jan 30;31(6):987-993
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2012.11.093 ] [Medline: 23246258 ]
17. Fadda M, Galimberti E, Fiordelli M, Romanò L, Zanetti A, Schulz PJ. Effectiveness of a smartphone app to increase parents'
knowledge and empo werment in the MMR vaccination decision: A randomized controlled trial. Hum Vaccin Immunother
2017 Nov 02;13(11):2512-2521. [doi: 10.1080/21645515.2017.1360456 ] [Medline: 29125783 ]
18. LeFe vre AE, Mohan D, Hutchful D, Jennings L, Mehl G, Labrique A, et al. Mobile Technology for Community Health in
Ghana: what happens when technical functionality threatens the effectiveness of digital health programs? BMC Med Inform
Decis Mak 2017 Dec 14;17(1):27. [doi: 10.1186/s12911-017-0421-9 ] [Medline: 28292288 ]
19. Zaidi S, Riaz A, Hussain SS, Omer SB, Ali A. Applying a governance barometer to vaccine delivery systems: Lessons
from a rural district of Pakistan. Vaccine 2020 Jan;38(3):627-634. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2019.10.052 ]
20. Punjab Information Technology Board (PITB). Tracking Vaccinators (E-VACCS): Government of Punjab URL: https:/
/www .pitb.gov.pk/tracking_e vaccs
21. Ebile Akoh W, Ateudjieu J, Nouetchognou JS, Yakum MN, Djouma Nembot F, Nafack Sonk eng S, et al. The expanded
program on immunization service delivery in the Dschang health district, west region of Cameroon: a cross sectional survey.
BMC Public Health 2016 Aug 17;16(1):801 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12889-016-3429-7 ] [Medline: 27530488 ]
22. Braun R, Catalani C, Wimbush J, Israelski D. Community health workers and mobile technology: a systematic review of
the literature. PLoS One 2013;8(6):e65772 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065772 ] [Medline: 23776544 ]
23. Calderón TA, Martin H, Volpicelli K, Frasso R, Díaz Arro yo EC, Gozzer E, et al. Understanding potential uptak e of a
proposed mHealth program to support caregiver home management of childhood illness in a resource-poor setting: a
qualitati ve evaluation. Mhealth 2017;3:19 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2017.04.03 ] [Medline: 28607905 ]
24. JSI. Africa Routine Immunization System Essential. Impro ving the performance of routine immunization systems in Africa
? A case of the drivers of routine immunization system performance in Cameroon URL: https:/
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 15 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX/3qvw4sd8qlr2o7003493odw1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Arise_CameroonReport_f inal5081.
pdf
25. JSI. 2018. Strengthening Immunization for the Urban Poor: Experiences and Lessons Learned from Five Country Studies
URL: https://www .jsi.com/JSIInternet/Resources/publication/display .
cfm?txtGeoArea=INTL&id=22079&thisSection=Resources [accessed 2020-01-10]
26. Barau I, Zubairu M, Mwanza MN, Seaman VY. Impro ving polio vaccination coverage in Nigeria through the use of
geographic information system technology . J Infect Dis 2014 Nov 01;210 Suppl 1:S102-S110. [doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu010 ]
[Medline: 25316823 ]
27. Gammino VM, Nuhu A, Cheno weth P, Manneh F, Young RR, Sugerman DE, et al. Using geographic information systems
to track polio vaccination team performance: pilot project report. J Infect Dis 2014 Nov 01;210 Suppl 1:S98-101. [doi:
10.1093/infdis/jit285 ] [Medline: 25316882 ]
28. Stanton M, Molineux A, Mack enzie C, Kelly-Hope L. Mobile Technology for Empo wering Health Workers in Underserv ed
Communities: New Approaches to Facilitate the Elimination of Neglected Tropical Diseases. JMIR Public Health Surveill
2016;2(1):e2 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/publichealth.5064 ] [Medline: 27227155 ]
29. Teng JE, Thomson DR, Lascher JS, Raymond M, Ivers LC. Using Mobile Health (mHealth) and Geospatial Mapping
Technology in a Mass Campaign for Reacti ve Oral Cholera Vaccination in Rural Haiti. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2014 Jul
31;8(7):e3050. [doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003050 ]
30. Wallis L, Blessing P, Dalwai M, Shin SD. Integrating mHealth at point of care in low- and middle-income settings: the
system perspecti ve. Glob Health Action 2017 Jun;10(sup3):1327686 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1080/16549716.2017.1327686 ]
[Medline: 28838302 ]
31. Rothstein JD, Jennings L, Moorth y A, Yang F, Gee L, Romano K, et al. Qualitati ve Assessment of the Feasibility , Usability ,
and Acceptability of a Mobile Client Data App for Community-Based Maternal, Neonatal, and Child Care in Rural Ghana.
Int J Telemed Appl 2016;2016:2515420-2515414 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1155/2016/2515420 ] [Medline: 28070186 ]
32. Vélez O, Okyere PB, Kanter AS, Bakk en S. A usability study of a mobile health application for rural Ghanaian midwi ves.
J Midwifery Womens Health 2014 Jan 08;59(2):184-191 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1111/jmwh.12071 ] [Medline: 24400748 ]
33. van Heerden A, Sen D, Desmond C, Louw J, Richter L. App-Supported Promotion of Child Growth and Development by
Community Health Workers in Kenya: Feasibility and Acceptability Study . JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2017 Dec 05;5(12):e182
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.6911 ] [Medline: 29208588 ]
34. Chaiyachati KH, Loveday M, Lorenz S, Lesh N, Larkan L, Cinti S, et al. A pilot study of an mHealth application for
healthcare workers: poor uptak e despite high reported acceptability at a rural South African community-based MDR-TB
treatment program. PLoS One 2013 May 28;8(5):e64662 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064662 ] [Medline:
23724075 ]
35. Gavi-The Vaccine Alliance. Annual Progress Report 2018 URL: https://www .gavi.org/results/g avi-progress-reports/
Abbreviations
EPI: Expanded Program on Immunization
LMIC: low- and middle-income country
mHealth: mobile health
TB: tuberculosis
TMK: Tando Muhammad Khan
UC: union council
Edited by G Eysenbac h; submitted 18.09.19; peer-reviewed by M Fiordelli, N Jarour, D Felt, J Boegner; comments to author 26.10.19;
revised version received 31.10.19; accepted 16.12.19; published 13.02.20
Please cite as:
Zaidi S, Shaikh SA, Sayani S, Kazi AM, Khoja A, Hussain SS, Najmi R
Oper ability , Acceptability , and Usefulness of a Mobile App to Track Routine Immunization Performance in Rural Pakistan: Intervie w
Study Among Vaccinator s and Key Informants
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(2):e16081
URL: https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
doi: 10.2196/16081
PMID: 32053115
©Shehla Zaidi, Saqib Ali Shaikh, Saleem Sayani, Abdul Momin Kazi, Adeel Khoja, Syed Shahzad Hussain, Rabia Najmi.
Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth (http://mhealth.jmir .org), 13.02.2020. This is an open-access article distrib uted
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 16 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXunder the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR mHealth and
uHealth, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://mhealth.jmir .org/,
as well as this copyright and license information must be included.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 2 | e16081 | p. 17 https://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/2/e16081
(page number not for citation purposes)Zaidi et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX