 
 
Private -sector investment 
opportunities in pri mary 
healthcare in Kenya: 
Implementation roadmap  
Report | Nov 20, 2018  
USAID   
 Contents  
Executive summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 1 
Priority investment opportunities  ................................ ................................ .........  5 
Investment opportunities in Kenya’s primary healthcare market  ................................ .........  5 
Prioritized opportunities  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  5 
Ten ‘big ideas’ for unlocking greater private sector investment  ..............................  7 
Enablers for specific sub -markets  ................................ ................................ ...............................  7 
Risk pooli ng and outpatient care: Establish sustainable coverage package(s) and fix 
payment delays at the National Hospital Insurance Fund  ................................ .....................  7 
Risk pooling: Increase the efficiency of private medical insur ance  ................................ ..... 14 
Pharmaceuticals: Remove Kenyan importers’ preferential treatment in public 
procurement of pharmaceuticals and assess viability and impact of program to support 
local manufacturing  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  16 
Medical education: Scale the provision of low -interest student loans to prospective 
medical students  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  20 
Cross -cutting enablers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  23 
Reform policy framework to enable counties to participate in public private partnerships 
and structure public -private collaboration opportunities at county or bloc level  ..............  23 
Promote market -based approaches to make the sector less reliant on official development 
assistance (ODA) and enhance the sustainability and impact of initiatives  .......................  25 
Provide transaction support to potential investments, particularly at the early stage (e.g., 
pre-LOI/MOU)  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  28 
Attract new investors by identifying opportunities for each sub -market and conducting 
large -scale investor engagement  ................................ ................................ ............................  29 
Raise and enforce quality standards for distribution, pharmaceuticals and diagnostics  ... 32 
Create a high -quality digital health data platform to inform and de -risk private sector 
investment decision -making  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 34 
County -level investment opportunities and actions needed to encour age 
investment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  38 
Isiolo County  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  39 
Kisumu County  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  41 
Makueni County  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  43 
Recommendations for the private sector to engage at county level across kenya  ................  45 
Stakeholder syndication  ................................ ................................ ......................  46 
  
 1 Executive summary  
Context for this work  
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Partnership Platform is a vehicle 
spearheaded by the Government of Kenya, with the support of the UN, to drive public -
private collaboration and help realize Keny a’s Vision 2030 and SDG aspirations. The 
SDG Partnership Platform has created several accelerator windows, the first of which 
was the SDG3 Cluster - Primary Healthcare .  
In this context, USAID and the UN’s SDG Partnership Platform launched a project to 
assess private sector investment opportunities in primary healthcare  in Kenya. The 
project is divided into three phases: Phase 1 –  identification of a set of private sector 
investment opportunities in primary healthcare; Phase 2 – identification of target 
companies/investors, development of an implementation roadmap, and syndication 
with key stakeholders; and Phase 3 – development of two signed Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) and/or Letter of Intent (LOI) related to a >$1M investment 
opportunity.  
This repor t summarizes the findings of Phase 2 of this work.  It builds on  the work 
conducted in Phase 1 that  identif ied and measured the size of  private -sector investment 
need  in primary healthcare  in Kenya . It identifies target companies and investors, 
outlines the  implementation roadmap for a national agenda to encourage greater 
investment , and shares details of  county -level investment opportunities.  
The report is based on four major activities:  
■ Engaging 15+ investors and healthcare businesses potentially intereste d in investing 
in primary healthcare  in Kenya  
■ Refining a set of 10 ‘big ideas’ to improve the enabling environment for private -
sector investment  and developing detailed descriptions and roadmaps for these 
ideas, learning from relevant case studies  
■ Syndicat ing the roadmap with more than 3 0 experts and stakeholders , and 
present ing the Phase 1 findings and 10 big ideas at a healthcare CEO Roundtable 
and the SDG Partnership Platform Finance and Business Modeling Workshop . 
■ Examining three counties as examples to  better understand county -level investment 
opportunities and what actions and incentives are needed at county -level to 
encourage greater private sector investment  
Current investment pipeline  
The investment pipeline in Kenya’s public healthca re market  is ‘thin ’, particularly in 
light of the $6 billion  of private sector investment into primary healthcare that Kenya 
needs  over the next 10 years. Through extensive interviews with healthcare businesses 
already invested in Kenya and investors looking at potentia l deals, we have identified 14 
deals currently under consideration by the private sector. Of these, nine are over $1  
 2 million in deal size .  Based on the deal size, financial viability, practical feasibility, and 
other criteria, we have prioritized four opp ortunities as high potential for concentrated 
support to enable deal closure .  
10 ‘big ideas’ for unlocking greater private sector investment  
Given that the existing pipeline of potential deals is relatively ‘thin’, Kenya needs to 
strengthen the enabling e nvironment to unleash a much larger volume of private sector 
investments. Towards this end, w e have identified 10 ‘big ideas ’ that would unlock much 
greater investor interest and deal flow . Some of these ‘big ideas’ are needed to  remove 
current barriers to  private sector investment in primary healthcare, others to better 
enable business case development in the primary healthcare  space , and still others to 
ensure fair competition and market sustainability . 
Enablers for  specific sub -markets  
1. Risk pooling  and o utpatient care : Drive incremental improvement of NHIF in 
parallel to passage of the amendments to the NHIF Act, establish sustainable 
coverage package(s) and fix payment delays issues at the National Hospital 
Insurance Fund (NHIF). Options could include cr eating a multi -tiered insurance 
package with combined risk pools within the NHIF, revising the NHIF 
reimbursement mechanism and/or levels, and reforming the NHIF payments 
process to eliminate delayed payments.  These measures will serve to unlock private 
sector investments by allaying the current concerns about the sustainability of 
NHIF’s coverage packages and NHIF’s administrative efficiency , which are 
adversely effecting investment decisions .  
2. Risk pooling : Increase efficiency of private medical insurance . For example, 
through digitizing the claims management process , benchmarking claim costs by 
disease type and benchmarking insurance companies’ operating costs against peers 
(e.g. per patient cost for maternal healthcare), as well as establishing a mechani sm 
for monitoring adherence to the risk -based capital requirements in the Insurance 
Act. This is important for primary healthcare, given that ~70% of the population is 
currently uninsured  and, even with the roll -out of UHC, the private insurance sector 
will likely need to be part of the solution to providing quality primary healthcare  
across the country .  
3. Pharmaceuticals : Remove Kenyan importers’ preferential treatment in public 
procurement of pharmaceuticals and assess viability and impact of program to 
support local manufacturing   
4. Medical education : Scale the provision of low -interest student loans to 
prospective medical education students; perhaps in return for post -graduate service 
in the public sector , e.g., counties participating in ownership and scale-up of the 
Afya Elimu model.  Prioritize  these loans for first for nurses, pharmacists and other 
entry level cadres of health workers where there is , by absolute number , the  largest 
need in the country  and thereby the strongest business case for investment,  given 
these volumes.   
 3 Cross -cutting  enablers  
5. Reform policy framework to enable counties to participate in PPPs and structure 
public -private collaboration opportunities at county or bloc level . 
6. Promote market -based approaches to make the sector less reliant  on Official 
Development Assistance (ODA) and enhance sustainability of initiatives and 
impact.  
7. Provide transaction support to potential investments, particularly at the early stage 
(e.g., commercial due diligence, business case development, financial mode ling, and 
development of technically sound PPP concept notes ). 
8. Attract new investors by identifying and crafting specific opportunities for each sub -
market and conducting large -scale investor engagement.  
9. Raise and better enforce quality standards in distri bution, diagnostics, and 
pharmaceuticals.  
10. Create a public good around digital health data through a common digital platform 
to enable and de -risk private sector decision -making on investments (e.g., granular, 
sub-national disease burden data).  
County -level  opportunities and actions needed   
Counties are critical  stakeholder s in securing and driving investment across the country. 
We selected t hree counties  — Isiolo, Kisumu, Makueni  — as examples in which to  explore 
investment attractiveness, business opportun ities and the incentives and other acti vities 
required  to encourage investment . Our in -depth study of these counties indicated that 
four  sub-markets offer  promising private -sector investment  opportunities:  outpatient and 
maternity care, risk pooling, diagn ostics and medical education.  
For all four of the se promising sub -markets,  counties could do much more to facilitate 
investment, such as conduct ing pre-feasibility studies , defining which private sector 
participation structure would be most helpfu l for th e county’s health needs and hiring a 
dedicated person  to engage with investors and other relevant bodies such as the PPP 
Unit  in the National Treasury.  Each dedicated county resource should , as part of their 
remit, stay connected to SDG Partnership P latfor m and request assistance from the 
Platform when  there are specific transactions that could be supported.  
To capture these county -level invest ment opportunities , companies will need to  be 
prepared to allocate business development staff time and effort for d ata collection  (e.g., 
on current  and potential volumes, pricing) , as these data are not available typically from 
county governments or third -party sources.  Even when transaction support is being 
provided by the SDG Partnership Platform, companies that allo cate significant 
management time and attention will get more out of the  support provided . In addition, 
many  opportunities will require a public tendering process (either for outsourced 
contracts or PPPs) , so companies should ensure proper capacity allocati on to participate 
in these processes .  
 4 Stakeholder syndication  
We have s yndicat ed the investment opportunities and enablers described in this report 
with a wide range  of experts and more than 30 stakeholders. Based on their input, we 
have refined and adapt ed the roadmaps to fit the reality on the ground and build on 
existing efforts . Although stakeholder input has already been significant, it is only a start 
to a multi -year journey of improving the national and county -level enabling environment 
for unlockin g much greater private sector investment in primary healthcare. Further 
work by the UN’s SDG Partnership Platform will be needed to continue syndicat e the 
results of this work to  build buy -in, reflect evolving healthcare landscapes,  and work 
with leaders a nd stakeholders implement  the roadmaps detailed in this report.  
   
 5 Priority investment opportunities  
We identified 14 investment  opportunitie s in Kenya’s primary healthcare  market, and 
prioritized four of these for transaction support b ased on a set of cri teria  including  deal 
size, feasibility, and match  of support needed and offered . 
Investment opportunities  in Kenya’s primary healthcare  market  
Kenya’s primary healthcare  investment pipeline is thin, particularly if we consider the  ~$6  
billion of private se ctor investment  need ed over the next 10 years ( see P hase 1 report1).  
We identified 14 investment opportunities in two categories .  These include both  investor -
driven  opportunities (e.g., by private equity funds)  as well as  companies seeking  
investment to expand.  These opportunities  span several sub -markets,  including 
outpatient and maternity care, distribution and retail, pharmaceutical s and diagnostics.  
The i nvestment size range s from $0.5  million  to $20  million . There is also a wide range of 
geographic c overage within Kenya, with several covering urban/peri -urban areas, several 
others focused on more rural areas, and several that are national in scope.  The companies 
are at different  stages of the investment process ; one has just start ed of a 10 -month 
feasibility study , while another is  ready to sign a letter of intent.  
Prioritiz ed opportunities  
Of the 14 opportunities identified , we prior itized  the four  that are both sizeable and that 
we believe have the potential to  move from deal development to deal cl osure stage  before 
mid-2019 . 
Specifically, we used the following criteria for prioritization:  
■ Deal size : Minimum $1 million.  
■ Timeline : Investment likely to close by mid -2019 . 
■ Economic viability : Profitability , evidence of business model applied successfull y 
in other countries/markets . 
■ Practical viability : Obstacles  to mid -2019  closure, e.g., investment requiring 
legislative reform  such as the PPP Act, or dependency on other transactions . 
■ Potential support needed : Manageable , practical scope in terms of size  of 
analysis required, geographic reach and data availability . 
                                                   
1“Today, the Kenyan private sector represents ~45% of the healthcare market, but this varies significantly by sub -
market. This private sector share is expected to increase to ~50% over the next 10 years through the replacemen t of 
both public and donor participation. Supporting this level of private sector participation, will require ~$6bn in 
investments over the next 10 years. This includes a ~$4bn investment in new assets (to support the forecasted 
growth in spend) and a ~$2b n investment in replacing existing assets.” – Private sector investment opportunities in 
primary healthcare in Kenya   
 6 ■ Social impact threshold : All investment opportunities are assessed to ensure 
that they contribute positively to primary healthcare in Kenya and have a clear 
linkage to delivering  social impact and driving equity.  
 
This prioritization resulted in highlighting four opportunities , details of which have  been 
shared with USAID staff overseeing this project (redacted in this public report) .  All four 
of these deals are by for -profit companies, although at least two of them would further 
define  themselves as social enterprises (for -profit companies with social motives at the 
heart of their mission).    
 7 Ten ‘big ideas ’ for unlocking greater 
private sector investment   
As noted, the existing pipeline of potential investments in primary  healthc are in Kenya is 
thin.  To strengthen the pipeline, we have identified a set of 10 ‘big ideas’ , i.e., enablers  
that will help  unlock much greater investor interest and deal flow .   
These ‘big ideas’  are either  specific to sub-markets , or cross -cutting : 
■ Specific  sub-market  enabler s (1-4). We focused on identifying enablers for 
sub-markets that have big  investment need s over the next decade , but are less 
attractive to investors in terms of profitability and deal size , as identified in the 
Phase 1 report . The ratio nale is that Kenyan leaders’ and stakeholders’ time and 
energy are better spent bolstering the enabling environment for these large, 
relatively untapped areas  (e.g., risk pooling) , rather than strengthening sub-markets 
that are already financially attracti ve (e.g., diagnostics ).   
■ Cross -cutting enablers  (5-10). In addition to the above, other critical cross -
cutting enablers  are required to improve the broader investment environment, 
especially in relation to unlocking the ability of counties to set up PPPs,  shifting 
from  heavy donor  funding  models to  private sector -inclusive ones , driving large -
scale  investor engagement, improving quality standards and increasing data 
availability through digitization of primary healthcare  systems.  
 
Significant efforts are already underway  to drive this agenda ; therefore , the 
implementation roadmaps described below seek to recognize, align with, and build upon 
these  efforts . In each area , we have  syndicated  the proposed roadmaps  with the key 
stakeholders driving each area  and aligned on the activities and milestones required . 
Where possible, we have identified ‘quick wins’ in addition to longer, multi -year 
transformation efforts. The information was correct when we compiled this report, but 
given the fast -moving nature of Kenya’s primary healthcare  sector , some details may 
have shifted after the writing of this report . 
ENABLERS FOR SPECIFIC  SUB -MARKETS  
Risk pooling  and outpatient care : Establish sustainable coverage package(s) 
and fix payment delays at the National Hospital In surance Fund   
Interviews with executives of healthcare businesses conducted in Phase 1  indicate that 
the changing landscape of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) and National Hospital 
Insurance Fund (NHIF) reforms are affecting business and investment decisio ns, 
especially in outpatient care and risk pooling.  Although there have been recent p ositive 
change s, e.g., the Kenya n government has commi tted to achieve UHC by 2022  and NHIF  
coverage has increased from 7% of the population in 2010 to 17% in 2017 , busines ses  
 8 remain concerned about the sustainability of NHIF’s coverage packages and NHIF’s 
administrative efficiency .  In addition, to date, there are limited ways for private se ctor 
insurers to participate in NHIF , and models where private sector can offer pack ages 
meeting defined parameters can be considered in order to expand the variety and types 
of insurance offerings in the Kenyan market and to encourage innovation in the 
insurance markets.  
Additionally, a recent decision has been made to implement UHC by w aiving user fees at 
public facilities. One of the lessons learned from a similar implementation model in 
Thailand was that private sector was not engaged sufficiently in the provision of publicly 
funded care in the initial roll out stages. This will be a c ritical issue  for the Ministry of 
Health to consider in the planning and execution of this UHC model.  
Insurance coverage packages  
In interviews, h ealthcare businesses cite the question marks around  the financial 
sustainability of NHIF’s coverage packages  as a fundamental risk  factor in considering 
investment decisions .  According to experts, there are serious doubts that the benefits 
and payouts of some coverage packages , e.g., the SUPA Cover , can be sustained . That 
said, there is ongoing work on defining sustainable benefits packages.  The Health 
Benefits Package Advisory Panel, appointed by the Cabinet Secretary of the Ministry of 
Health, has assessed the cost of  various  benefit  packages , whilst the NHIF has also 
assessed, but not shared the breakdown of,  the cost of SUPA Cover package. These two 
parties have been working independently and have not yet  reconciled  and aligned the 
cost structures of the aforementioned insurance packages .  
To address these challenges, a sustainable coverage package is require d. This could be 
achieved by reconciling packages to create a consolidated coverage  package . In creating 
this package, the government could consider making the payment structure and model 
capitation -based and creating a framework for the private sector to participate in, e.g.,  
enabling a marketpla ce where private sector can packages that meet pre -defined 
requirements.  This would be a significant boost to enabler the private sector insurers to 
expand beyond the 2 -3% of the population that they currently ser ve.  In addition , NHIF 
could consider  outsourcing funds management  and claims processing , which would 
further create private sector opportunities . 
There are examples of other countries that have dramatically increased healthcare 
coverage through a national  essential benefits package .  Rwanda, for example, developed 
the Community -based Health Insurance (CBHI) scheme to provide 100% population 
coverage and meet the needs of its informal sector. The scheme trebled outpatient 
utilization and reduced out -of-pock et costs by 82% over 10 years ( Exhibit 1).   
 9 EXHIBIT 1 
 
Administrative efficiency  
Healthcare businesses interviewed report cash flow issues arising from payment delays 
that are common with NHIF reimbursem ents today . Private -sector players currently 
experience payment timelines  of up to one year , negatively impacting the investment 
attractiveness of healthcare services provision . At the same time, there may be room to 
improve NHIF’s administrative efficienc y.  The NHIF’s administrative costs as a share of 
revenues decreased from 42% to 22% while the benefit pay -out ra tio increased from 52% 
to 75% between 2010 to 20172. However, this pay -out ratio is still  relatively  low, 
indicating an opportunity to improve operational efficiency.  
Digitizing the system would help to eliminate payment delays while improving 
operational efficiency at NHIF . For example, a leading European insurance company 
digitized its insurance systems and tools to improve efficiency and workf low 
management of claims . As a result, customer waiting time s for disbursement  fell 30% 
and staff productivity rose  10% (Exhibit 2).  
                                                   
2 Khama Rogo, Kenya National Hospital Insurance Fund Reforms: Implications and Lessons for Universal Health 
Coverage  
▪The CBHI ’s program funding 
constitutes 66%  from hous ehold 
premiums , 14%  from the 
Government of Rwanda,  10%  from 
Global F und,  6%  from co -pa yment 
and ~ 1%  from social and private 
health insurance
▪Members pa y annual premiums  of 
a pproximately $6 per family member
▪Subs cription for members hip is  
voluntary and pa yment of premiums 
is based on economic status,  but 
coverage excludes  private health 
centers
▪The CBHI program management 
was  moved from the Ministry of 
Health tothe Rwanda Social 
Security Board under the Ministry 
of F inance
Rwanda’s Community Based Health Insurance (CBHI) scheme 
S ituation Approach Impact
S OURCE : US AID’s 2013 African strategies for health Rwanda profile, Rwanda’s 2013 MoH annual report▪90%  of the population enrolled 
by 2012
▪CBHI health schemes available in 
96%  of Rwanda’s health centresThe Mutuelles de S ante
Community Based 
Health Insurance 
(CBHI) scheme was 
developed to provide
100%  population 
coverage and meet the 
needs of the informal 
s ector, where 
historically acces s  to 
and utilization of 
healthcare services had 
been very low0.94
0.31+203%Outpatient utilization
2003-2014,   per capita rates
Out of pocket payments
2000-2010,  %
11
2-82% 
 10 EXHIBIT 2 
 
Enablers  and quick wins  
The solutions outlined above can o nly be implemented after  passage of the 
amendments to the NHIF Act  currently underway , which include reforms to NHIF’s 
governance and regulatory oversight . Meanwhile, stakeholders are already working on  
the first  two of the below  two quick wins , both of wh ich should continue , whilst the 
third  will act as a powerful tool to  take NHIF to a world -class level, including inform ing 
the development o f a coverage and payment model and digitizing the system3 (Exhibit 
3): 
■ Assessing and costi ng potential coverage packages  
■ Improving  the quality management process by reallocating quality accreditation   
functions (for both public and private sector providers) from NHIF to an other entity  
■ Conducting a diagnostic with the aim of fully understanding  the current status of 
NHIF’s operational and organizational model, plan for growth and management of 
                                                   
3 This work specifical ly builds on and avoid s duplication of work  with the  World Bank and IFC, who have provided 
substantial support to NHIF in reforming NHIF to achieve UHC, including providing technical support for the design 
and implementation of a Health Insurance Subsidy P rogram for the Poor (HISP) and financing implementation of a 
certification system for increased quality insurance and improvement. - The Path to Universal Health Coverage in 
Kenya: Repositioning the Role of the National Health Insurance Fund, IFC, June 201 5 
▪Ran in-depth diagnostic of pre -identified 
inefficiency drivers
▪Conducted pilot s tudy in wors t performing  
reg ion to o ptimize operations among the 
entire claims process
–Created a custom demand capacity 
tool to understand customer demand 
and how to manage against it
–Developed prioritization 
methodology for appraisals and 
defined prioritization responsibility 
–E na bled dynamic as s ignment a nd 
reas s ignment ba s ed 
on ca pa city 
–Realigned teams  into dis tinct 
g eog ra phies  to reduce tra vel needs
–Implemented dis tributed performance 
management
E uropean insurance company ’s digitization of insurance systems
S ituationApproach Impact
S OURCE : McKinsey & Company▪Highly successful pilot ,  with historically worst 
performing region performing best after pilot’s 
operational improvements ▪Leading E uropean 
insurance company 
wanted to improve 
efficiency and workflow 
management of claims 
and offer more 
timely /flexible service 
to its customers 
▪Company identified 5 
drivers of 
inefficiencies/inflexibilities 
–P oor understanding 
of demand for claims
–P oor prioritization of 
claims requested
–Manual or fixed 
dispatching without 
dynamic 
reassignment 
capability 
–Claims teams 
scattered across 
regions 
–Variability in claims 
staff performanceAverage customers' waiting time for reimbursement
Indexed to 100
Average productivity of staff
Indexed to 100100
70-30%
100110+10% 
 11 liabilities, and taking learnings  from success cases in other  countries  and to design a 
long -term path for NHIF to become a world class public health insur ance provider  
 
EXHIBIT 3 
 
Roadmap s 
Given work is already underway to address the first two quick wins, the first roadmap 
here outlines steps required to undertake a diagnostic of  NHIF in three  phases that last 
for a total of seve n to ten weeks  (Exhibit 4). 
 
E nablers and quick wins
S OURCE : E xpert interviews1 A bill has already been proposed to amend the NHIF Act   
2 These are the near -term quick wins before completion of government reforms▪Assess current NHIF digital system to identify key 
challenges and areas of improvement
▪Design a digital system to reduce the amount of time 
it takes to receive pa yments Enabler: Amend the NHIF Act1
▪Drive passage and implementation of amendments to the 
NHIF  Act,  as per the bill currently under review by the S enate,  which 
will strongly aid in opening a venues for other larger initiatives 
such as creating a sustainable coverage package as well as digitizing 
NHIF
▪E stablish transparency and accountability across NHIF
▪Implement changes to the composition of the board
▪Subject NHIF to regulation by the Insurance Regulatory 
Authority
▪Reconcile and make transparent the new benefits 
package that has been costed
▪Create a unified and consolidated sustainable 
coverage package for all citizens
▪Consider reforming the payment structure and 
model to a capitation based model 
▪Create a framework for private sector participation 
e.g.  in funds management and provision of elements of the 
coverage 
▪Continue improving quality through capacity building,  
performance improvement and change management▪Cost NHIF coverage packages (already undertaken by an NHIF -
independent Health Benefits P ackage Advisory P anel vetted by the 
Cabinet S ecretary of the Ministry of Health)
▪Separate quality accreditation functions from NHIF and 
allocate these responsibilities to a different public entity
▪Conduct a diagnostic of NHIF with the aim of fully 
understanding the current status of NHIF ’s operational,  business and 
organizational model ,  and to design a long term path for NHIF  to 
become a world class public health insurance providerQuick wins related to coverage & payment model21 Coverage and payment model
Digitization of NHIF2 
 12 EXHIBIT 4 
 
Once the NHIF Act has been amended, the bulk of the work o n the two needed initiatives 
to address private sector concerns on NHIF’s financial sustainability and ad ministrative 
efficiency can commence.  The roadmap  for the first of these —creat ing a sustainable 
coverage package and payment mechanism —is divided into four phases over four years  
(Exhibit 5). 
 
Implementation roadmap to conduct diagnostic on NHIFLead agencies XXX
Activities
Milestones Key stake -
holders4-5 weeks 1-2 weeks 2-3 weeks
Understanding the current state 
of NHIFIdentify opportunities 
from global best practicesDevelop roadmaps for NHIF become a 
world class public health insurance 
provider
▪Review global success cases 
of other national health 
insurance funds and identify 
opportunities for NHIF  to 
adopt similar approaches in 
terms of:
–Organizational and 
operational practices
–Growth plans
–S ustainability and 
management of liabilities
–Roles pla yed▪Clearly dra w out NHIF ’scurrent
–Coverage plans
–Business model 
–Operating model
▪E stablish NHIF ’soperational and 
organizational effectiveness,  both 
internally (e.g.  claims processing) 
and in terms of underwriting 
▪Clarify NHIF ’sgrowth plan both 
geographically and demographically
▪Understand the current and long -
term balance sheet and how to 
manage liabilities
▪Review current roles NHIF  is 
pla ying▪Create an ambitious yet practical path to 
raising NHIF ’soperational and organizational 
effectiveness to meet world class standards,  
including those for digitization
▪Dra w up a strategic growth plan that outlines 
an approach to significantly expand coverage 
and address inequity ,  taking into account 
county health insurance plans
▪Adopt global lessons on sustainable packages 
and management of liabilities to la y out a clear 
route for NHIF  to ha ve a best practice,  
sustainable financial structure
▪Identify the core roles for NHIF  to take strong 
leadership on and partners to take others
▪S yndicate roadmaps with stakeholders
▪S et of opportunities 
identified for NHIF  to adopt 
based on global success cases 
for operational and 
organizational effectiveness , 
growth ,  sustainability ,  and 
roles pla yed▪Review completed on current 
status of NHIF ’s current 
operational and organizational 
practices,  future growth plans,  
financial sustainability and 
management of liabilities,  as well 
as roles pla yed▪Recommendations outlined to take 
operational and organizational practices to 
world class level 
▪Growth plan dra wn up and syndicated
▪Route to setting up a best practice,  sustainable 
financial structure outlined
▪Clear lead roles for NHIF  identified
▪S takeholder syndication conducted▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Insurance Regulatory 
Authority▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Insurance Regulatory Authority▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Insurance Regulatory Authority 
 13 EXHIBIT 5 
 
The roadmap to  digitiz e the NHIF also has  four phases that last for a total of three years  
(Exhibit 6). 
 
Implementation roadmap to create a sustainable coverage package and payment 
mechanism
0-12 months
Achieve quick winsEstablish coverage 
packages ImplementEstablish a payment 
mechanism and private 
sector participation
Activities▪Reconcile the costed 
coverage package with 
NHIF ’s coverage package
▪Create a minimum unified 
and consolidated benefit 
package for all Kenyans
▪E stablish mechanisms to 
address barriers to sign up 
by creating a customer 
friendly process to dra w in 
the large numbers of people 
for the risk pool▪Continue to assess 
and cost coverage 
packages (in progress 
by the Health benefits 
P ackage Advisory 
P anel)
▪Identify a body 
separate from the 
NHIF  to conduct 
quality accreditation
▪S et out quality 
improvement metrics▪Analyze pa yment model to 
adopt –develop options 
and evaluate using financial 
and actuarial models 
▪Implement a capitation 
pa yment model based on 
analysis
▪S tructure options for 
private sector participation 
in processing of claims and 
provision of supplemental 
packages for higher income 
tiers▪Implement NHIF ’s 
unified and consolidated 
benefit package for all 
citizens
▪Roll out a rigorously 
analyzed pa yment model 
▪Implement private 
sector participation 
models –e.g.,  through 
tenders for pa yments 
processing,  establishing 
marketplace for offering 
supplemental packages
Key stake -
holders▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Health Benefits P ackage 
Advisory P anel
▪Kenya Healthcare 
F ederation▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Health Benefits 
P ackage Advisory 
P anel
▪Insurance Regulatory 
Authority
▪Kenya Healthcare 
F ederation▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Kenya Healthcare 
F ederation▪NHIF
▪Ministry of Health
▪Kenya Healthcare 
F ederation
Mile-
stones ▪NHIF ’s package reconciled 
with the costed package
▪Consolidated benefit 
package established▪Coverage package 
and costing 
established
▪Quality accreditation 
body identified▪New pa yment model 
adopted
▪P rivate sector role in NHIF  
identified▪Consolidated 
sustainable coverage 
package identified and 
rolled out12-24 months 18-36 months 3-4 yearsLead agencies XXX 
 14 EXHIBIT 6 
 
Risk pooling: Increase the efficiency of private medical insurance  
Only ~20% of the Ke nyan population has medical insurance . The private sector  is highly 
fragmented , with over  30 insurance companies competing for just ~2%  of the Kenyan 
population . It faces three main challenge s in the  inefficien t risk pooling  industry.  
First, the claims ma nagement process is highly paper -based and manual , with payments 
typically being received 45 -60 days after treatment . Because of highly manual systems, 
the health insurance claim fraud rate, at ~40%, is much higher than the global rate of 
~12-17%.  
Second , according to Kenya’s Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA), 20 out of 32 
medical insurance companies succumbed to underwriting losses totaling KES  621.64 
million in the fiscal year ending December 2016. This was due to the excessive cost of 
healthcare  drive n by high cla im costs.  
Third, t he Insurance Act has set out a risk -based capital requirement for the medical 
insurance industry to adhere to , requiring a  15% premium reserve risk charge and 13% 
claims rese rve risk charge. However, only a few companies in t he industry observe these 
minimum risk -based capital  guidelines.  
Implementation roadmap to digitize the NHIF  Lead agencies XXX
0-3 months
Initial phase
Task F orce set -up and 
diagnosticDesign phase
S olution designImplementation phase
Complete roll out of 
NHIF systemPilot phase
P iloting of interim solution
Activities▪Create digital ‘squad ’ to:
–Develop design of 
digital NHIF solution 
with recommendations 
on current system 
addressed
–Assess technology 
options and vendors
–Design target 
operating model▪Create S teering 
Committee / Task 
F orce to drive 
initiative
▪Assess opportunities 
to improve the 
current NHIF digital 
system,  including 
understanding 
customer pain points 
and satisfaction 
drivers
▪P rioritize most 
impactful wa ys to 
improve the system▪P ilot in UHC pilot counties 
and health facilities
▪Work with NHIF claims 
unit and other parts of the 
organization on rollout and 
change management
▪Collect customer feedback 
and KP Is;  improve final 
solution▪F ully roll out final 
product to entire 
country
▪Track key KP Issuch as 
reduction in dela yed 
pa yments,  reduction in 
costs,  uptake of cover 
etc.  and implement 
quarterly reporting 
sessions
Key stake -
holders▪NHIF
▪Ministry of ICT▪NHIF
▪Ministry of ICT
▪P roviders and other 
claimants
▪P atients▪NHIF
▪Ministry of ICT
▪County government
▪P roviders and other 
claimants
▪P atients▪NHIF
▪Ministry of ICT
▪County governments
▪P roviders and other 
claimants
▪P atients
Milestones▪Initial design / MVP  
(minimum viable product) 
of digital solution complete▪Identification of key 
challenges and 
customer pain points 
in current NHIF
system 
▪Alignment on 
aspirations / KP Is▪Improved digital solution 
and rollout model
▪KP Isreached in pilot 
counties▪Roll out of system to 
entire country
▪KP Isreached nationally 
over time3-12 months 1-1.5 years 1.5-3 years 
 15 Risk pooling cont ributes sig nificantly  to primary healthcare and, with  ~70%  of the 
population  currently uninsured,  even with the roll -out of UHC, the private insurance 
sector will likely need  to be part of the solution to providing quality primary healthcare, 
reducing out -of-pocket expenditure and avoiding catastrophic spending and medical 
impoverishment.  
To address the  challenges  in the private risk pooling market , four solutions could 
incre ase the efficiency of private medical insurance:  
■ Digitize the claims management process  by utilizing the electronic claim 
system that is being promoted by the Association of Kenya Insurers (AKI), which 
the industry has a imed to set up by January 2019 . Curr ently,  only the largest four 
insurers are on track to achieve this goal.  
■ Benchmark claim costs  by disease type and set a minimum /maximum per 
ailment.  
■ Benchmark insurance companies’ operating expenses against those of 
their peers to flag inefficiencies, e.g ., staff costs and acquisition costs . 
■ Establish a mechanism for monitoring and adherence to the risk -based capital 
requirement in the I nsurance Act . 
Roadmap  
The two -year roadmap to  digitize the claims process , benchmark claims and operational 
expenses , and monitor risk -based capital requirement , has three phases  (Exhibit 7).  
 16 EXHIBIT 7 
 
Pharmaceuticals: Remove Kenyan importers’ preferential treatment in public 
procurement of pharmaceuticals and assess viab ility and impact of program to 
support local manufacturing  
Private sector investment in the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry  in Kenya is 
relatively low today.  Local manufacturers find it difficult to compete with imported 
products made by larger inte rnational players that benefit from larger scale, newer 
technologies, and better quality.  Today, Kenya has only ~40 local manufacturers , only 
two of which have achieved WHO PQ (a marker of global standards of quality 
manufacturing).  Kenya’s small domestic  pharma manufacturing sector stiff import 
competition from India’s industry of ~ 10,000 manufacturers  and China’s industry of 
~4,000 manufacturers, as well as other global production centers such as Europe, 
South Africa, and the Middle East . As a result, l ocal manufacturing accounts for a 
minority of the drugs consumed in Kenya, with ~72% of all pharmaceutical products  by 
value  being imported.  
National policy currently provides a small advantage to local manufacturers in public 
procurement : local manufacture rs receiv e a 15% price preference , compared with a 10%  
preference  for importers  that are at least 51% Kenyan -owned . Industry experts indicate 
that this  5% differenti al is too small to effectively stimulate local production, which 
Implementation roadmap for digitization of claims process, benchmarking 
costs and monitoring of risk -based capital requirementLead agencies XXX
1-2 months
Initial phase
Task F orce set -up and diagnostic
Key 
stake -
holders▪Association of Kenya Insurers
▪Insurance Regulatory Authority
▪Ministry of Health
▪P rivate insurance companies▪Association of Kenya Insurers
▪Insurance Regulatory Authority
▪Ministry of Health
▪P rivate insurance companies▪Association of Kenya Insurers
▪Insurance Regulatory Authority
▪Ministry of Health
▪P rivate insurance companiesPilot phase
P iloting of interim solution1-2 years
Design phase
S olution design
Activity▪Interview private insurance companies 
to understand current industry view 
and main challenges
▪Analyze and define optimum claim costs 
and operational expenses amongst 
private medical insurance companies
▪Determine the process and timeline to 
roll out benchmarked claim costs and 
operational expenses
▪E stablish enforcement mechanism to 
the Insurance Act in monitoring of the 
risk-based capital requirement
▪Reach out to Association of Kenya 
Insurers to explore options to support 
in the creation of the electronic claim 
system▪Track performance of 
insurance companies and 
quality of healthcare provided 
to citizens with optimum claim 
costs and operating expenses
▪Roll out digital system to all 
facilities▪Design self -regulating / 
industry -driven process to 
ensure benchmarked claim 
costs and operating expenses 
are implemented
▪P ilot digital system in priority 
facilities3-6 months
Mile-
stones to 
reach▪Claim cost and operational expenses 
benchmarked
▪S upport provided to creation of an 
electronic claim system▪S elf-regulating mechanism to 
ensure optimum costs are 
implemented established
▪E lectronic claim system piloted▪P atient protection and quality 
healthcare tracked
▪E lectronic claim system fully 
rolled out 
 17 typically faces higher raw  materials, electricity, and labor costs compared to production 
in Asia.  
Hence, one recommendation is to remove the 10% preference in national tenders for 
importers that are at least 51% Kenyan owned.  Import businesses consist of little value 
addition in Kenya and are not significant job creators or drivers of productivity or 
technological advancement.  Paying an extra 10% from scarce national resources to 
effectively subsidize importers’ businesses yields little health or developmental impact 
while impedi ng the potential market for domestic manufacturers.  
Beyond this question of price preference in national tenders, Kenya should examine 
whether a broader, more comprehensive support program for local manufacturing is 
warrante d. If a comprehensive support pa ckage is established for Kenya’s domestic  
pharma ceutical  manufacturing, more investors would be attracted to this sector. W hile 
some drugs produce d may  not be for use in primary healthcare , based on Kenya’s 
current te chnological level , a significant contri bution of the drugs manufactured will  be 
generic  drugs with high relevance  for primary healthcare treatment.  
It is clear from other countries’ experience that significant effort —including but going 
well beyond preferences in national tenders —is needed to grow a domestic pharma 
manufacturing sector of substantial size.  Ethiopia’s recent experience provides a case in 
point.  Ethiopia spent several years coordinating across its Ministries of Health, Finance, 
and Industry to develop a comprehensive National S trategy and Plan of Action for 
Pharmaceutical Development. This strategy detailed a comprehensive local 
pharmaceutical manufacturing support program under which the Government offers a 
range of financial and n on-financial incentives to promote local pharma ceutical 
manufacturing , including the creation of a dedicated special economic zone for pharma 
manufacturing, tax breaks, preferential access to foreign exchange, as well as a 25% 
preference in the national tender  (Exhibit 8).  
 18 EXHIBIT 8 
 
The Ethiopia case as well as global experience shows that given the strong incumbents in 
the pharma sector, it takes well -coordinated, well -resourced, and c omprehensive 
program s like Ethiopia’s to have a c hance at substantially domestic drug manufacturing .  
Kenya should carefully assess whether such a program would be impactful and have a 
good chance at succeeding before embarking on such an involved initiative.  We 
recommend that Kenya conduct a detailed  impact and feasibility assessment as to 
whether increased local pharmaceutical manufacturing is worth the substantial 
resources and effort required to build it up.  On the impact side, this would entail  
assess ing the effects of having a local industry on  access to health commodities, 
consumer prices, job creation, GDP growth, and trade balance .  On the feasibility  side, 
Kenya’s investment attractiveness  vis-a-vis alternative manufacturing locations , as well 
as cross -governmental will and capabilities  to supp ort the sector, would need to be 
examined .  Key stakeholders across not just the Ministry of Health, but also the Treasury 
and the Ministry of Industry, should be convened to examine the facts together and 
decide if such a program is warranted.  
 
Roadmaps  
The roadmap to remove the 10% procurement preference for local importers  would 
entail the Ministry of Health authorizing this issue to be examined, followed by a 
detailed study, then presentation to the National Treasury for approval and ratification  
(Exhibit 9). 
S OURCE : F MHACA, E IC, E xpert interviewsE thiopia ’s National S trategy F or P harmaceutical Manufacturing Development
1 Varies based on location and export performanceProfit -
enhancing
Operatio -
nal
efficiencyCategory Sub-category
VAT 
exemptions ▪V AT tax exemption on imported inputs to production,  e.g.,  
AP ICorporate 
income tax 
exemption ▪6-12 years of tax holida y1
▪Tax rate of 30%  after holida y  
Availability of 
infrastructure ▪E lectricity rate at 3 US  cents/Kwh 
▪Land lease (serviced land) ~$ 0.5/m2/monthRegulation ▪F ast-tracked product registration
Access to 
forex▪P referential access to forexAccess to 
finance  ▪Up to 70%  loans for new investments and 60%  for 
upgrading projects at 10%  interest rateCustom duty 
exemptions ▪100%  duty exemptions on capital goods and ra w materials
▪E xemptions for spare parts up to 15%  of value of capital 
goodsPublic 
procurement▪Closed bids if > 1 local manufacturer
▪25%  price preference in international tendersRevenue -
enhancingEthiopia’s stated incentive scheme (2016)
The launch of the national pharma 
manufacturing s trategy was  co -s pons ored 
by the Minis ters  of F inance,  Indus try ,  and 
Health
P harmaceuticals is a strategic 
commodity with national 
security implications .  We want 
quality ,  affordable medicines for our 
people.  
–Director General, FMHACA
The focus in this industry is to 
substitute imported essential 
medicines by locally produced 
ones and produce for export 
markets.  The major targets in this 
regard are to...  increase foreign 
exchange earnings from 3 million 
US D to US D 111 million  
–GTP -IIGoE has implemented a package of supportive policiesStrong national will from three 
ministries to support domestic 
pharma manufacturing 
 19  
EXHIBIT 9 
 
The roadmap to assess the viability and impact of a comprehensive program to support 
local pharmaceutical manufacturing is divided into three phases occurring in sequ ence 
(Exhibit 10).  
 
S OURCE : E xpert interviewsImplementation roadmap to the 10%  procurement preference for local importers
1-3 months 1-3 months 3-9 months
Activities▪Build comprehensive case for 
removal of importer preferences 
with clearly defined scenarios and 
impact
▪Convene relevant stakeholders 
fromthe National Treasury 
involved with public procurement 
policy and present case with 
recommendations▪Convene relevant stakeholders 
within the Ministry of Health 
involved with public procurement 
policy
▪P resent high level case for 
removal of preference
▪Request authorization for deeper 
analysis of case to be presented 
at a later date ▪Drive proposal for amendment to 
the procurement policy through 
the ratification process
Milestones▪Business case developed outlining 
the actions recommended and the 
impact analysis
▪P resentation of business case to 
relevant bodies
▪F inal decision by relevant bodies ▪Alignment on steps necessary to 
get proposal passed
▪Ratification on proposal through 
legislative change▪Meeting with key stakeholders
▪P resentation of high level case 
and authorization for deeper 
analysis 
▪S et date for reconvening of 
relevant bodies and presentation 
of findingsKey stake -
holdersConvene decision makers and 
make recommendationBuild a case Oversee ratification process
▪Ministry of Health
▪National Treasur y
▪Kenya Medical S upplies Authority▪Ministry of Health
▪National Treasur y
▪Kenya Medical S upplies Authority▪Ministry of Health
▪National Treasur y
▪Kenya Medical S upplies Authority 
 20 EXHIBIT 10 
 
Medical education: Scale the provision of low -interest student loans to 
prospective medical students  
Interviews with investors in the medical education business suggest that it is a 
promising sector for investment, with relatively high profitability as long as sufficient 
student volumes can be maintained.  One critical factor in ensuring sufficient and 
stable student volumes is the affordability and financing of tuition fe es.  It is still 
common for t uition fees to be paid out -of-pocket, and hence m any prospective medical 
students are unable to afford tuition fees. Enrolment rates are therefore low and drop -
out rates are high4. This undermines the business case for the priv ate sector to invest in 
medical education, as training institutions depend on revenues from students paying 
their fees.  
The Afya Elimu fund , a well -respected student loan provision mechanism set up 
through the FUNZOKenya program and funded by USAID and  the Higher Education 
Loans Board  (HELB ), offers one solution to the medical education affordability 
challenge ( Exhibit 11). The fund provides low -interest loans (at 4%) to prospective 
                                                   
4 As reported on Afya Elimu website: afyaelimu.co.ke/about/  
S OURCE : E xpert interviews ▪Ministry of Industry, Tra de, a nd 
Coopera tives
▪Ministry of Hea lth
▪Na tiona l Trea sury
▪F KP M12 months 6-9 months 1-3 years
Activi -
ties▪Convene releva nt line minis tries  
a nd a g ree on proces s  tha t will 
res ult in a n evidence -ba s ed 
decis ion reg a rding  whether to 
ena ct a  comprehens ive prog ra m to 
s upport loca l ma nufa cturing
▪Conduct deta iled dia g nos tic on the 
current s ta te of pha rma  
ma nufa cturing  in Kenya ,  including  
collecting  pla nt -level da ta  on:
–Ins ta lled s ca le a nd ca pa city 
utiliza tion
–Qua lity levels
–T echnology levels  a nd 
cons tra ints▪If decis ion is  ma de to s upport the indus try:
–Develop a  comprehens ive implementa tion 
pla n
–Hold officia l la unch of implementa tion pla n 
a nd us e it a s  a n opportunity eng a g e 
inves tors
–R oll out a nd tra ck implementa tion 
▪If decis ion is  ma de not to s upport the indus try ,  
reexa mine 15%  preference in na tiona l tenderEstablish decision -making 
process and conduct diagnosticBuild a case Oversee ratification process
▪Conduct eva lua tion for loca l pha rma  
ma nufa cturing ,  including :
–Impa ct:  on drug  prices  to 
cons umers ,  a cces s  to medicines ,  job 
crea tion,  GDP  g rowth,  a nd tra de 
ba la nce
–F ea s ibility:  inves tment a ttra ctivenes s ,  
motiva tion,  ca pa bilities ,  a nd ma rket 
dyna mics
▪Develop deta iled bus ines s  pla n,  
including  inves tor a ttra ctivenes s  a nd 
s ources  of funding
▪Convene body to decide if a 
comprehens ive prog ra m to s upport 
domes tic pha rma  ma nufa cturing  is  
wa rra nted
Milest -
ones ▪Des ig na tion of body res pons ible 
driving  proces s  a nd fina l decis ion
▪Completed dia g nos tic▪If decis ion is  ma de to s upport the indus try:  
Implementa tion pla n publicly la unched,  with 
inves tors  invited a nd eng a g ed
▪If decis ion is  ma de not to s upport the indus try:  
potentia l roll -ba ck of 15%  price preference in 
na tiona l tender▪Decis ion on whether to provide a  
comprehens ive pa cka g e of s upport for 
domes tic pha rma  ma nufa cturingLead agencies XXX
Implementation roadmap to assess the viability and impact of a comprehensive 
program to support local pharmaceutical manufacturing
▪Ministry of Industry, Tra de, a nd Coopera tives
▪Ministry of Hea lth
▪Na tiona l Trea sury
▪F KP M▪Ministry of Industry, Tra de, a nd 
Coopera tives
▪Ministry of Hea lth
▪Na tiona l Trea sury
▪F KP M
1 F ederation of Kenyan P harmaceutica l Manufacturers 
 21 medical students  and has assisted ~5,000 student s to date . HELB acts as the fund 
manager and processes loan applications through its portal.  
EXHIBIT 11 
 
The Afya Elimu model already had created significant impact and should be further 
scaled up.  Currently, prospective studen t demand for loans is approximately four t imes 
the amount being disbursed.  In addition, although one county has already started to pay 
into the fund, more remains to be done to ensure county financial buy -in and 
particip ation in this impactful model.  
To e nable this next phase of scale -up, Afya Elimu should be expanded to increase its 
capacity, service offering and operational efficiency in three ways:  
■ Scale the model  by securing additional financing from county governments to 
provide loans to more prospect ive medical students by:  
– Adapting legislation amendments developed by HELB to enable county 
governments to invest in Afya Elimu (Kakamega county has already adopted this 
legislation and committed capital to Afya Elimu).  
– Ringfencing county allocations to en sure funds are channeled to students in 
programs that address county -specific human resource needs.  
The AfyaE limu model
S OURCE : AfyaE limu facts sheets; expert interviews ▪Fund has grown from just over $1m in 2013 toover $12m 
toda y
▪~18,000 beneficiaries with ~5,000 graduates
▪However ,   only 25%1of these graduates ha ve secured 
employment ,  largely owing to:
–Limited county absorption of graduates due to budget 
constraints
–F und beneficiaries often come from vulnerable groups and 
therefore don’t ha ve the connections needed to get jobs
▪Over 90% of those employed ha ve begun to repay their loan 
▪The creation of the AfyaE limu fund indicates that medical 
education is a priority for the national government and is 
supported by the international community
▪There is still a significant provision gap as AfyaE limu only has 
the capacity to grant loans to 42%  of applicants, with a loan 
cap of $400 per year -half the tuition cost for KMTC and a 
third of the tuition cost for private and faith based teaching 
institutions
▪Employment is a key concern as 75%  beneficiaries are 
unable to find jobs and therefore unable to begin loan 
repa yments▪Human resource for health 
(HRH) remains a major 
challenge in Kenya with 
shortages in qualified 
health workers being one 
of the key obstacles
▪Analysis shows that the 
inability to pay for 
medical education is a 
major contributor to 
Kenya’s HRH challenges
▪One initiative designed to 
address these challenges is 
the Afya Elimu fund, a 
USAID and HELB
financed revolving fund that 
aims to provide affordable 
loans to medical students 
in Kenya▪Creation of a loan mechanism 
to provide affordable loans 
to medical students in 
Kenya
▪Applicants receive a maximum 
of KES 70,000 per year to 
cover tuition fees
▪The interest rate for the 
loans is 4%  (accrues upon 
disbursement)
▪After completion of studies,  
students receive a 1-year 
grace period
▪P rincipal repa yments revolve 
back into the fund with 
interest pa yments used to 
support loan recovery 
activities
▪The loan repayment period 
is 5 years 
S ituation Approach Impact
1 E xperts say employment is likely to be under -reported, owing  to tudents failing to declare when they gain employment 
 22 – Setting up a bonding model in which recipients of county -backed loans are 
contracted to work within that county for a fixed period immediately after they 
complete their studies.  
■ Widen service provision  to inclu de postgraduate medical courses, which further 
attracts county buy -in and participation since these would address some of their 
critical shortages.  
■ Improve fund performance  to establish a self -sustainin g, revolving fund  by 
targeting higher loan repayments through the bonding model which directly links 
graduates to employment opportunities, as well as increased follow up and 
engagement with beneficiaries to improve loan repayment compliance.  
These initiat ives would  serve to  enlarge the medical education mark et for private -
sector investors by increasing demand for and  enrolment in medical education 
institutions . Of course, this initiative would also have broader benefits for Kenya’s 
health system, which cur rently suffers from a health worker staffing shortage estimated 
to exceed 200,000 . 
These loans should prioritize nurses, pharmacists and other entry level cadres of health 
workers where there is , by absolute number , the  largest need in the country  and 
ther eby the strongest business case for investment, given these volumes.  
 
Roadmap  
The implementation roadmap to provide low -interest loans to medical students, has 
three phases and lasts five years (Exhibit 12) 
  
 23 EXHIBIT 12 
 
CROSS -CUTTING ENABLE RS 
Reform policy framework to enable counties to participate in public private 
partnerships and structure public -private collaboration o pportunities at  county 
or bloc level  
Kenya’s p ublic sector health provision is str uggling to keep up with demand . Quality of 
care in certain facilities is low and there are shortages of essential supplies.  High -quality 
care can be made  availa ble through partnerships with the private sector, but  the cost of 
private health provision remai ns a major deterrent to its uptake . 
Public private partnerships (PPPs) could enable the private sector to help county and 
national governments meet demand at a lower cost. County -level desire  to set up PPPs is 
high, h owever, currently, there are  barriers t o county participation , including a lack of 
standardized framework for counties to engage in PPPs . The counties perceive that they 
are unable to participat e in PPPs, even though the PPP U nit within the Treasury  has a 
dedicated county office  to facilitate c ounty participation in PPPs . The PPP process is long 
and not well understood; it takes 18 -36 months to complete , with Cabinet approval  alone 
Implementation roadmap to provide low -interest student loans to medical students
S OURCE : Afya E limu factsheets; UHC roadmap; expert interviewsLead agencies XXX
6-12 months
Activity▪Open application process with updated 
structures and d isburse loans to 
successful applicants
▪Monitor beneficiaries through 
education journey and beyond to 
ensure repayment compliance and 
assist with employment opportunities
▪Modify processes where efficiency can 
be improved
▪P artner with public and private 
institutions to provide employment 
opportunities for beneficiaries
▪Utilize repayments to finance new loans 
and work towards sustainability▪Fast-track engagement with counties 
already approached by HE LB and 
showcase successful negotiations
▪Work with HE LB to assess feasibility of 
widening of service provision within Afya
E limu and achieving financial sustainability
▪Work with HE LB and CoG to identify 
steps required to enable and incentivize 
counties to become financial partners in 
the fund, widen service provision of fund 
and improve performance with the goal 
of sustainability
▪Develop comprehensive roadmap
▪Align stakeholders on responsibilities9-24 months 2-5 years
Partnership with HELB Expansion of Afya Elimu Establishment of amended fund
Roll out of implementation plan. This 
includes: -
-Legislative changes and provision of 
support needed to enable counties to 
engage as financial partners
-S tructure and policy changes with the 
AfyaE limu required to:
-P rovide counties with the comfort 
and incentives needed to become 
financial partners
-Widen service provision to include 
advanced programs 
-Improve efficiencies to achieve 
sustainability
Milstone
sto 
reach▪Commencement of application process 
and disbursement to successful 
applicants
▪Reports with status of beneficiaries and 
recommendations for support
▪E vents designed to match beneficiaries 
with potential employers
▪E stablishment of sustainable revolving 
facility▪S igned financial commitment from 
counties
▪Feasibility and impact report on widening 
service provision and fund sustainability
▪Identification of steps required to achieve 
the three initiatives and development of 
implementation plan
▪S takeholder engagement and alignment 
on roles and responsibilities▪S igned commitments from relevant 
stakeholders
▪Amendment of fund structure to allow 
new financing and wider service 
provision
▪Amendment of fund policy to grant 
counties incentives and improve fund 
performance
▪Disbursement of funds into fund 
accountKey 
stake -
holders▪Higher E ducation Loans Board
▪Council of Governors
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation▪Higher E ducation Loans Board
▪Council of Governors
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation▪Higher E ducation Loans Board
▪Council of Governors
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation
▪National Treasury
▪Ministry of E ducation 
 24 taking up to 12 months. In addition, the  capacity to structure and execute PPPs is 
limited, especially at the count y and bloc level s. 
The amendments to the PPP Act under review by the Senate – including the creation of 
formal capacity at county level to conduct initial PPP development and the removal of 
Cabinet approval requirements – will address some of these barrier s. Others can be 
resolved in three ways:  
■ Build county government PPP capabilities and strengthen national 
government support . Identify obstacles to county PPP engagement, analyze 
county PPP capability gaps, develop capability -building plans, assess the sup port 
required at the national level to drive the PPP process, and raise awareness of the 
PPPs unit and the support they can offer counties.  
■ Facilitate PPP transactions . Identify health PPPs for fast -tracki ng and showcase 
success stories;  provide transactio nal support  to other promising health PPPs; 
monitor completed  PPPs for health impact and value for money; identify potential 
new transactions in the health sector and target key investors.  
■ Provide technical support for PPP policy reform. Evaluate the curre nt PPP 
landscape and its effectiveness, identify PPP enablers and assess the need for further 
amendments to the PPP Act.  
 
In the mean -time, an opportunity exists to fast -track potential investments through 
alternative public -private contracting agreements,  including contracting under the 
Procurement Act and structuring of Special Purpose Vehicles whereby both the county 
and private sector investor  are shareholders.    
Roadmap   
 25 The roadmap to continue reform s regarding the  PPP policy framework, build capacity 
and identify capacity for counties to participate in PPPs is divided into  three parallel 
phases (Exhibit 13). 
EXHIBIT 13 
 
Promote market -based approaches to make the sector less reliant on official 
devel opment assistance (ODA) and enhance the sustainability and impact of 
initiatives  
Foreign aid from development partners is expected to level of f or decrease in the coming 
years . For example, the 2018 fiscal year US federal budget includes a 5% reduction in 
foreign aid spending. Meanwhile, Kenya’s population continues to grow, and its public 
sector has limited capacity to increase health budgets because the debt level stands at 
56% of GDP (the debt level for developing countries recommended by the I nternation al 
Monetary Fund  is 40% of GDP).  
The development and adoption  of innovative  financing and  business models  and creative 
ways to engage the private sector  can shift some of the burden away from constrained 
public sector institutions . This would encourage tho se able to pay for health services to 
turn to private sector service provision  and encourage a broader array of service 
offerings that better suit patient needs. Means testing in public sector facilities could 
Implementation roadmap to reform policy framework, build capacity, and 
identify opportunities for counties to participate in P P P s
S OURCE : UN S DG P latform joint workplan (October 2018); expert interviewsLead agencies XXX
▪Create “fast track window” for less 
complicated health P P P s and showcase 
successful transactions
▪Identify promising health P P P s and 
provide counties and private sector 
with transaction support
▪Identify counties interested in pursuing 
P P P  opportunities and provide 
feasibility and transactional support 
including full development of RF P s
▪F acilitate closing of health P P P s and 
monitor partnership performance▪F acilitate dialogue at county level to 
clarify challenges experienced with 
the P P P  process (already underwa y)
▪Conduct capacity needs assessment 
and provide training on health P P P s 
for key parties2
▪P rovide technical support to enhance 
capabilities and visibility of MoH
representative of the PPPU
▪Initiate early engagement between 
counties and PPPU to showcase 
engagement possibilities and benefits▪S upport completion of the draft P P P  
Health S ector S trategy
▪P rovide TA to key parties1in relation to 
the reforms
▪P rovide training for County 
Governments to draft and refine 
relevant county policies and regulations
▪F acilitate bi -annual county health 
stakeholder forums to discuss P P P  
optimization enablers
▪S howcase success stories to increase 
a wareness and encourage public support  Activities 
(occu -
rring in 
parallel 
for 3 
initia -
tives )
Milesto -
nesto 
reach▪Completion of small scale P P P  
transactions to galvanize support and 
showcase P P P  success stories
▪S hort list of investment opportunities
▪P rogression of deals to RF P  stage
▪RF P  release for counties to attract 
private sector investment via P P P s
▪Closing of health P P P s and systematic 
updates on partnership performance▪F inalized P P P  Health S ector S trategy
▪T echnical support provided key parties
▪Training of county officials on policy 
drafting and refinement
▪Bi-annual county health stakeholder 
forums held with report on P P P  
recommendations
▪Circulation of success stories to 
relevant stakeholders and the general 
public▪Regional events held with counties 
and report compiled on county level 
challenges with P P P s
▪Completed capacity needs 
assessment and training of key 
parties
▪T echnical support for MoH
representative of the PPPU
▪S howcasing of successful PPPU
engagement possibilities Build National & County 
government PPP capabilities Facilitate PPP transactions Provide technical support 
for PPP reform process 
Key 
stake -
holders▪P P P  Unit
▪S DG P la tform
▪Minis try of Hela th
▪CE C Hea lth Committee
▪County a nd reg iona l bloc lea ders hip▪P P P  Unit
▪S DG P la tform
▪Minis try of Hela th
▪CE C Hea lth Committee
▪County a nd reg iona l bloc lea ders hip▪P P P  Unit
▪S DG P la tform
▪Minis try of Hela th
▪CE C Hea lth Committee
▪County a nd reg iona l bloc lea ders hip
1 PPPU ’s county office, CoG Health Committee and MoH representative of the P P P U  2MoH, CoG Health Committee and CE C Health Committee  
 26 help identify patients who could be shifted to  the private sector.  For example, Uganda is 
conducting a project in Kampala to strengthen private facilities and decongest public 
ones.  As an other  example, a quarter of the HIV+ population in Kenya are willing and 
able to pay for services currently provi ded by donors. Shifting ~60% of these patients to 
private sector service provision would create additional demand for private sector 
services (hence bolstering the financial health of these businesses) and reduce donor 
spend on HIV service provisio n by ~20 % over the next 5 years ( Exhibit 14). 
EXHIBIT 14 
 
 
Many efforts that employ these approaches are already underway in Kenya, but efforts 
should continue to further scale them in the future . The SDG Partnership Platform office 
could become a hub for spreading and assisting other stakeholders in the health system 
with adopting and implementing innovative approaches. Two particularly promising 
approaches are:   
■ Total market approach (TMA). Sect ors work together to provide health services 
for all population segments, i.e., the poorest communities receive free products, 
those with more resources receive partially subsidized products, and those with 
high resources purchase their products from the c ommercial sector.  
Opportunities to shift HIV treatment from donors to the private sector
390
P rivate 
sector cost 
(5 yrs)Private
sector cost1,000 -1,100
P ublic 
sector cost375-400-64% Private sector 
HIV 
treatment 
cost expected 
to drop ~60%  
in 5 years
85%2%
98%15%
Current split22%
Mid case 
scenario78%
Best case 
scenarioP ublic P rivate
140 11090 120230
Best case scenario Current scenario230Donor Other sourcesCost overview for a medium care need, 
stable patient, US D per year per patient
Patient split by sector provision
P rivate sector 
provision 
expected to 
increase ~20%  
in 5 years
Funding per source, US D million
Donor 
funding 
expected to 
drop ~20%  in 
5 years
S OURCE : McKinsey analysisS ituation Approach Impact
▪~26% of total healthcare 
spend in Kenya is through 
donor resources 
▪The majority of these 
funds is dedicated towards 
provision of essential 
healthcare services
▪This level of donor support 
is unsustainable with 
several donors 
considering reducing 
their contributions in 
emerging economies,  many 
of which depend on donor 
funding to provide health 
services to the poor
▪A significant portion of the 
population is willing to 
pay for health provision but 
are currently donor 
supported,  e.g.,  ~24%  of 
HIV positive Kenyans are 
willing to pay >$ 100 per 
year for treatment▪~60% of those willing to pa y >$100 
can be transferred to the private 
sector through 3 initiatives:
▪Offering of streamlined health 
packages
▪Lowering healthcare provision 
costs by:-
–P ooled procurement system
–Development of capitation 
model
▪Leveraging sustainable health 
financing mechanisms
▪These initiatives are implemented in 2 
phases :
–P hase 1:  Shift the upper band of 
those willing to pa y (>$350) to 
existing private sector
providers
–P hase 2:  Shift the lower band of 
willingness to pa y ($100 -350) 
through alternative financing 
mechanisms 
 27 ■ Making markets work for the poor (M4P). Based on the premise that poor 
people are active market participants (selling their labor or labor -intensive 
products), this model aims to reduce poverty through market intervention instead 
of direc t intervention. In malaria prevention, for example, donors fund an NGO to 
provide mosquito nets at heavily subsidized rates. Under the M4P approach, donors 
identify a local mosquito net manufacturer and work with them to provide nets at 
an affordable price  and market their product effectively  (e.g., through social 
marketing) . 
Innovative business models can be adopted to improve operational efficiencies and 
ultimately provide more value for money for the consumer, leading to greater 
affordability of primary healthcare.  
 
Roadmap  
The roadmap to develop and adapt innovative business models is divided into 3 phases 
occurring in sequence ( Exhibit 15). 
EXHIBIT 15 
 
Implementation roadmap to promote market -based approaches
S OURCE : S DG P latform P HC workplan (Oct 2018) 3-6 months
Acti-
vities6-24 months 1-5 years
Set-up and coalition building Rapid idea developmentScale -up of initial ideas and ongoing 
new idea development
▪Analyze existing business models (e.g.  social 
marketing models like M 4P  and TMA) and 
potential new business models for universal 
access to quality affordable P HC
▪Organize workshops with global,  regional and 
national domain experts to model out 
promising business models
▪F acilitate scaling up of an existing promising 
business model and showcase results to 
relevant stakeholders
▪Convene relevant stakeholders from the 
public,  private sector and donor community 
to showcase potential business models and 
align on initiatives and responsibilities▪S upport hackathons,  innovation 
incubators,  and other test -labs
▪S upport validation and action -
research of on -g oing or new 
P HC business models proof of 
concept in Kenya
▪Ra pidly test,  prioritize,  and 
iterate on the most promising 
a pproaches
▪Drive adoption of new business 
model ideas
▪P air promising models with 
stakeholder responsible for 
implementation,  performance 
and monitoring▪E stablish S DG Innovation Lab in 
collaboration with S tanford and other 
strategic partners
▪Coordinate bi -annual P artnership 
P latform and Multi -S takeholder 
P artnership initiatives to create 
synergies
▪S cale / increase adoption of new 
business models
▪Monitor implemented business 
models 
▪P rovide ong oing s upport and tracking 
of new business models to aid 
success (e.g.,  in recruitment,  
introduction to potential partners)
Mile-
stones ▪Report detailing existing and new business 
models with feasibility and impact scenarios,  
with co -branding of all major partners
▪Major convening of stakeholders to align on 
initiatives and g oals
▪P resentation of performance metrics of scaled 
business model as proof of concept
▪S igned commitment from major partners to 
implement initiatives▪Validation or otherwise of 
ong oing business models
▪Adoption of business models
▪P ilots of 3-6 promising business 
models
▪Alignment on stakeholders in 
charge of each promising model▪Hold annual Innovations Labs
▪Multiple examples of scaled 
adoption of new business models
▪Report on performance of new 
business models
▪Comparison of new business 
models performance to forecasted 
performanceKey 
stake -
holders▪Kenya Healthcare F ederation
▪Development partners
▪S ocial enterprise s
▪S DG P latform▪Kenya Healthcare F ederation
▪Development partners
▪S ocial enterprises
▪S DG P latform▪Kenya Healthcare F ederation
▪Development partners
▪S ocial enterprises
▪S DG P latformLead agencies XXX 
 28 Provide transaction support to potential investme nts, particularly at the early 
stage  
To achieve  UHC and Kenya’s  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), $6  billion is 
needed in private sector investments over the next 10 years  (details can be found in 
report 1) . Both the public and private sector s face cha llenges in progressing 
investments and deals in the primary healthcare sector . Private sector’s decision -
making is often hampered by lack of readily available data, as well as uncertainty 
regarding who should be key touchpoints in government for regulatory  questions, 
potential partnership discussions, and other requests. In the public sector, counties  
often lack the capacity to identify and assist potential investors, identify and prepare 
potential opportunities for public -private collaboration, and develop  business cases 
and manage RFP processes .  
Hence, to support the private sector investors, the SDG Partnership Platform should, 
on a continuous basis:   
■ Track the pipeline of interested investors  and potential deals  
■ Understand  the specific needs of investor s 
■ Support ing investor requests, e.g., provid ing introductions, help  build ing business 
cases, offering analytics support  
■ (Through 2019), flag potential deals in the pre -termsheet stage above $1 million in 
size to McKinsey for potential dedicated support  
To support county capacit y to attract private sector investments, including PPPs once 
the PPP Act is amended, the SDG Partnership Platform should : 
■ Conduct additional county -level studies (akin to the three county -level studies in 
this report) to identify priv ate sector investment opportunities  
■ Support county -level staff to conduct pre -feasibility studies for potential investment 
opportunities  
■ Link county -level staff with potentially interested investors  
These initiatives are expected to accelerate the timeline  and volume of private sector 
dealmaking in primary healthcare in Kenya .  
Roadmap  
The roadmap to provide transaction support to private investors and counties has 
parallel streams of activities  (Exhibit 16). 
  
 29 EXHIBIT 16 
 
Attract new investors by identifying opportunities for each sub -market and 
conducting large -scale investor engagement  
As noted in Chapter 1, the existing pipeline of primary healthcare investments currently 
under consideration by investor s is thin.  In addition to accelerating the timeline of 
investments already under consideration (which the previous ‘big idea’ seeks to do), 
more is needed to directly engage new pools of potential investors.  These untapped 
potential investors often hold back due to perceived operational and financial risks  in 
investing in healthcare in Africa , high transaction costs  for the deal size (compared to 
other sectors such as infrastructure) , and the time required to develop business cases 
that have uncertain pay -offs.  
A multi -stakeholder initiative to identify promising business cases and create the 
conditions to accelerate investment in commercially viable private -sector projects would 
help to address the above challenges. This would involve an investment campai gn to 
showcase detailed, promising business cases to a target audience of investors, followed 
by a strong drive to publicly pledge and sign letters of intent. Three key groups of 
stakeholders would need to play vital role s:  
Implementation roadmap to provide transaction support to private investors and 
counties 
S OURCE : UN S DG P latform; McKinsey & CompanyPrivate sector activities and milestones County activities and milestones
▪Identify investment opportunities in primary healthcare
▪P rioritize opportunities based on feasibility ,  size,  impact,  and 
private sector interest
▪Define most attractive private sector investment 
opportunities
▪Review existing business models to identify replicable 
success cases for showcasing for investment
▪S et up mechanism for tracking the investor pipeline and 
investor progress,  e.g.,  weekly internal check,  monthly 
external reach -out to P E  funds,  bi -weekly investor contact
▪Identify investor needs,  e.g.  development of business cases,  
analytics work etc.
▪P rovide required support and engage relevant stakeholders
▪In Q3 2018 ,  identify how to support investors post -
McKinsey support
▪Track investor pipeline i.e.  opportunities that are in early 
phases to opportunities that ha ve been closed▪S et up county investment teams including hiring a point 
person at each county for interfacing with potential 
investors
▪Identify potential private sector investment opportunities 
at the counties and prioritize opportunities based on 
need
▪Design mechanism for tracking county investment 
progress
▪Assist counties in designing required business models for 
prioritized investment opportunities
▪Assist counties in developing business cases for 
prioritized investment opportunities
▪Train county teams on how to approach investors as well 
as develop business models and business casesActivities
▪A list of potential private sector investments identified and 
prioritized by attractiveness
▪Mechanism for tracking investor pipeline operational
▪Current success cases showcased forpotential investmen t
▪Investor challenges and bottlenecks identified and solved
▪By end of 2019,  facilitate at least 5 investments.  Of these,  
~2 should be supported by McKinsey
▪Mechanism for pushing investments across the pipeline 
developed▪A county investment team as well as a point person for 
interfacing with investors set up
▪County level investment opportunities identified and 
prioritized
▪Mechanism for tracking county investment progress 
established
▪County challenges and bottlenecks identified and solvedMilestones 
to reach 
 30 ■ The  Government of Kenya and cou nty governments. The Government 
would prioritize investment promotion in specific sub -markets related to primary 
healthcare  and commit to legislative/policy changes to support agreed investment 
areas, while county governments would be responsible for imple menting national 
policy and engaging with private -secto r investors considering sub -national  
investments.  
■ The private sector. The private sector would invest via investment pledges, 
subject to realizations of commitments made by the Kenyan public sector . 
■ Bilateral, multilateral and private donors. Donors would act as brokers 
between the Government and the private sector, support capability -building on the 
part of the Government, form part of the leadership council and help drive and 
track implementation of t he initiatives.  
In working through the promising business cases and identification of target investors, 
the potential  for setting up innovative private sector financing instruments  should  be 
explored to  unlock the Kenyan capital market , such as  social impa ct bonds  and 
approaching  pension funds as po ssible health sector investors.  
 
The Grow Africa G8 New A lliance for Food Security and Nutrition is an example of a 
successful multi -stakeholder, collective  action  approach  designed to rapidly  increase 
private se ctor investment in agriculture in 10 African nations. Forty -nine companies 
signed letters of engagement for a total investment of $3 billion that reached 8.2 
million farmers ( Exhibit 17).  
 31 EXHIBIT 17 
 
Driving a similar  initiative  for the primary healthcare sector in Kenya  entail  the Kenya n 
government proactively reaching out to companies and attracting investments aligned  
with national and county priorities, build ing long -term investment pa rtnerships between 
the private and public sectors, and establish innovative approaches to investor 
engagement and expansion of the Kenyan private sector healthcare market . 
Roadmap  
The roadmap to attract new investors is divided into four phases over five y ears (Exhibit 
18). 
 
Grow Africa G8 New alliance for F ood S ecurity and Nutrition
S OURCE : Symposium on Global Agriculture and Food Security –Advancing Food and Nutrition Security at the 2012 G8 Summit; May 18, 2012; “More than 
$3 billion in Private Sector Investment for the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition,” USAID Fact Sheet, 18 May 2012S ituation Approach Impact▪Private sector investment in agriculture in 
African countries was lagging due to perceived 
operational and financial risk, non -business -
friendly environment, inconsistent policies, 
limited infrastructure and lack of trust
▪In 2012, in response to growing concerns 
about global food security and lack of 
investment in agriculture, the Grow Africa 
“New Alliance for Food S ecurity and Nutrition ” 
was launched at the G 8 summit
▪This is a first -of-its-kind, African -led private 
sector investment campaign employing a 
rapid process to accelerate commercially 
viable private sector projects in-line with 
country agricultural development priorities
▪Collective action approach achieved through 
efforts by the three key stakeholders:
–10 African nations : P ledged to refine 
policies in order to improve investment 
opportunities
–40 private sector partners : Disbursed 
investment pledges once agreed conditions 
are met by the G 8 and the African nations
–G8 countries : Committed to support the 
preparation and financing of agricultural 
infrastructure projects
Company X intends to progress the following project in Country Y with the 
collaboration and partnership of the Government of Country Y. Th e project 
is….<insert project description>
To realize this project, Company X will contribute <insert speci fic contributions> …. 
The Government of Country X intends to provide <insert contribut ions>, including the 
mechanisms for coordination with private sector, farmers, and ac ross Government 
entities, that are required for a sound and sustainable policy, regulatory, 
administrative and enabling environment …
G8 Members intend to provide appropriate technical and, where wa rranted, financial 
support to accelerate implementation, helping to close gaps in f unding or policy 
building, with the overall goal of facilitating private investme ntThe project described below is consistent with the investment pr iorities identified by 
the country -led Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(CAADP ) investment plans. In particular, this project aims to contribu te to Country 
Y’s national targets of  <insert target>. These investments could have the following 
impact <insert potential impact) …
To advance this commitment over the next 12 months, Company X wi ll take the 
following actions: <insert actions> …
We at Company X are eager to begin taking steps that will aid in the sustainable 
development …The purpose of this document is to express Company X ’s commitment to the New 
Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition through its investment activities in Sub -
Saharan Africa. In the coming years, Company X commits to partne ring and 
collaborating with the respective governments, donors, and other partners to 
progress this set of investments. All parties recognize that ach ieving transformational 
and  sustainable economic growth and impact smallholder liveliho ods requires 
attracting significant and responsible private investments. Our commitment is a 
response to the commitments of G8 Members to align their support to the 
Government of Y ’s agricultural development objectives as well as the Government of 
Y’s commitment to promote a business enabling environment that pro vides 
confidence to both the domestic and international private sector to achieve these 
objectivesLetter of Intent –Company X Paragraph structure 
▪Acknowledgement and 
link to country agricultural 
development objectives
–Link to country 
targets
–Description of 
potential project 
impact (if available)▪High-level, philosophical 
commitment
–Generic for all  
company Letters of 
Intent
▪Description of project 
commitment
–Investment value (if 
available) and 
commercial case 
–Government 
commitment (generic 
or specific)
–General G8 
commitment (generic)
▪12-month action plan & 
closing statement
Align project 
with country 
investment 
prioritiesMar-Apr 2012:
Criteria for 
projects to 
achieve country 
objectives (e.g., 
commercially 
viable, small -
holder impact)
May 2012:
Bilateral 
meetings at 
the GA 
Investment 
Forum in 
EthiopiaEnd 2012 :
High -level 
leadership 
event to 
reinforce top -
to-top 
commitmentOngoing 
though 2013 : 
follow -up 
support to 
ensure 
implemen -
tationFebruary 2012 :
Invitation to 
companies 
looking to 
accelerate 
projects in Africa
“Hard to top the energy, 
charge and enthusiasm 
inthe room. Put the 
private sector ’s key role 
in African agriculture on 
the map. ” –Govt official
Letter of 
Intent (LOI) to 
communicate 
actual public 
pledge
Impact:
▪49 companies signed LOIs
▪$3bn+ investment pledged
▪Investments reached 
8.2mn farmers“This process has really pushed our company 
to clarify our priorities in Africa and has forced 
our corporate and regional organizations to 
jointly fast -track discussions that would have 
taken at least 12 more months.”
–Global company executive
“It was great to 
meet so many 
companies with 
concrete 
proposals on the 
table.” –African 
Min of Ag officialProcess and impact Situation and approach 
 32 EXHIBIT 18 
 
Raise and enforce quality standards for distribution, pharmaceuticals and 
diagnostics  
Industry experts  and business leaders  cite the lack of quality standards enforcement  as a 
major impediment to private sector investment , particularly in the sub -markets of 
distribution, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and diagnostics.  This lack of quality 
enforcement has created an unfair playing field , as quality players find it difficult  with  
sub-standard services and products that are offered at a lower price.  
Distribution  
Drug expiry and wastage are common because of substandard storage and transport. 
The distribution market is very fragmented, with the multiple layers between the 
manuf acturers and patients creating leakage and opportunities for counterfeit or expired 
products to enter the market. In 2017, a market survey by the Kenya Association of 
Pharmaceutical Industry (KAPI) found an 8% prevalence rate of sub -standard 
medication. Ex perts believe this rate may be higher  in reality . 
Pharmaceuticals  
Implementation roadmap to attract new investors
S OURCE : S ymposium on Global Agriculture and Food S ecurity –Advancing Food and Nutrition S ecurity at the 2012 G8 S ummit; May 18, 2012; “More than $ 3 billion 
in P rivate S ector Investment for the New Alliance for Food S ecurity and Nutrition, ” US AID Fact S heet, 18 May 2012Lead agencies XXX
4-6 months
Bus ines s  cas e development and pre -
prep3-4 months 4-6 months
Event preparation Follow -up6-12 months
Monitor and s upport
Acti-
vities▪For ea ch sub -ma rket:
-Identify potentia l 
projects for LOIs
-Conduct follow -up 
ca lls
-Refine dra ft LOIs
-S et up fa ce -to-fa ce 
country -compa ny 
discussions to fina lize 
LOIs a nd next steps
-S et concrete dea dlines 
with public visibility▪For ea ch sub -ma rket:
-Monitor eng a g ement 
between priva te investors 
a nd host g overnment
-Monitor investment 
interest a nd support GoK
to ma inta in investor 
support throug h e.g ., 
showca sing  of successful 
investments a nd 
hig hlig hting  potentia l new 
investment opportunities▪For ea ch sub -ma rket:
-Identify interna tiona l 
a nd reg iona l 
compa nies to invite
-Conta ct compa nies to 
confirm pa rticipa tion
-Identify priority 
investors▪Form lea dership body, including  na tiona l 
a nd county representa tives a nd other 
potentia l pa rtners
▪Assess investment la ndsca pe a nd identify 
new/underutilized sources of fina nce a nd 
models to increa se investment
▪Develop business ca ses for prioritized 
sub-ma rkets
▪Identify ba rriers to investment a nd policy 
/ leg isla tive cha ng es required
▪Identify la rg e a nchor investor willing  to 
co-bra nd the initia tive
Mile-
s tones  ▪S ig ned investment 
pledg es from priva te 
sector▪Reg ula r reporting  of sta tus 
of investments to lea dership 
council
▪S howca sing  of successful 
investments in interna tiona l 
forums▪Identifica tion of key 
compa nies a nd investors
▪Confirmed list of 
a ttending  compa nies
▪Confirmed list of 
a ttending  investors▪Forma tion of lea dership body
▪Assessment of current investment 
la ndsca pe
▪Identifica tion of priority sub -ma rkets
▪Deta iled outline of business ca ses
▪Identifica tion of ba rriers to investment 
a nd policy / leg isla tive cha ng es required
▪Commitment from priva te sector pla yer 
to a ct a s a nchor investor a nd co -bra ndKey 
s take -
holders▪P riva te sector
▪Na tiona l a nd county 
g overnments
▪P otentia l investors
▪Donor a g encies▪P riva te sector
▪Na tiona l a nd county 
g overnments
▪P otentia l investors
▪Donor a g encies▪P riva te sector
▪Na tiona l a nd county 
g overnments
▪P otentia l investors
▪Donor a g encies▪P riva te sector
▪Na tiona l a nd county g overnments
▪P otentia l investors
▪Donor a g encies 
 33 According to experts, the Kenyan pharmaceuticals market has a high rate of sub -
standard and counterfeit drugs.  Many of these sub -standard drugs are due to leakages 
in the supply chain as no ted above, and other counterfeit and sub -standard products are 
brought in by unscrupulous importers.  Domestic manufacturing also suffers from 
uneven quality, as n on-compliance with national Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) 
regulations remains a challenge . A study by the United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO) shows that over 70% of pharmaceutical companies sampled 
achieved a GMP rating of C5,i.e., “high risk”.  Producing high quality drugs is more 
expensive than producing counterfeit or lower quality drugs, so cracking down on 
substandard and counterfeit drugs would create a more even playing field for businesses 
featuring quality manufacturing.  
Diagnostics  
Anecdotally, experts in the diagnostics field question the accuracy rate of diagno stic lab 
testing across Sub -Saharan Africa . There have been no large -scale studies about the 
accuracy of lab testing in Kenya, but a  study6 in Uganda revealed that ~22% of lab tests 
are inaccurate. In Kenya c ompliance with strict quality standards is uneve n at best , with 
only two domestic labs certified by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO).  
Two initiatives could help to  overcome these quality enforcement  challenges:  
■ Assess quality levels and enforcement capacity.  This involves conduct ing a 
quality audit to understand the quality gaps in distribution, pharmaceuticals and 
diagnostics, followed by capacity benchmarking to understand where the capacity 
gaps lie (e.g., number of WHO -qualified inspector s, regulatory agency budgets).  
■ Reform q uality standards enforcement. Based on the above assessment, 
develop an implementation plan to improve quality levels, present it to stakeholders 
for syndication, and implement. The plan would include  budget reforms (e.g., 
increases in the pharmacy and poi sons boards budget ), capability -building (e.g., 
train inspectors on WHO PQ/GMP guidelines ), policy changes (e.g., amendments to 
PPB responsibilities to strengthen enforcement ) and o ngoing measurement and 
evaluation, including periodic quality audits to mea sure progress, identify gaps, and 
review reform plans.  
Roadmap  
The roadmap to raise and strengthen enforcement of quality standards in distribution, 
pharmaceuticals and diagnostics has three phases over two years  (Exhibit 19). 
                                                   
5 GMP compliance rating system where the lower the compliance with WHO GNP guidelines, the higher the risk 
rating. (A - low risk company, B - medium risk company and C - high risk company)  
 Amuk ele TK, Jones R, Elbireer A, Test Cost and Test Accuracy in Clinical Laboratories in Kampala, (2018)   
 34 EXHIBIT 19 
 
 
Create a high -quality digital health data platform to inform and de -risk private 
sector investment decision -making  
Recent  advances in h ealth Information and Communications T echnology (ICT) in Kenya  
include launching electronic health project s in ~40 counties  and using mobile health 
(mHealth) to provide  access to healthcare financing and remote clinical care  through , 
e.g., the M -TIBA health savings plan. Policies such as the Kenya National e -Health Policy 
and the Nationa l Fiber O ptic Backbone I nfrastructure have been positive steps in 
creating the necessary  enabling  environment for the health ICT landscape.  In addition, 
the Kenya Health Data Collaborative (KHDC) , together with  the Ministry of Health and 
its partners , have  review ed progress towards the overall goal of one well -functioning 
country -led health information system  and have planned to carry out a Harmonized 
Health Facility Assessment and drive through data management legislation by 2020.  
However, interviews with potential private sector investors highlighted two big 
challenges : the limited availabili ty of granular, sub -national disease burden data to 
enable private sector decision -making on investments, and  the lack of national standards 
and frameworks for establi shing a common, quality assured  platform for health data.  
Implementation roadmap to raise and strengthen enforcement of quality standards in 
distribution, diagnostics, and pharmaceuticalsLead agencies XXX
3-6 months
Activity▪Roll out implementation plan
▪Modify implementation where 
greater efficiency can be realized
▪Monitor implementation and 
benchmark with plan
▪S et up reporting structure to ensure 
regular updates on quality 
enforcement▪Develop implementation roadmap 
and present findings to relevant 
parties
▪Align parties on implementation 
roadmap and requirements for each 
stakeholder group▪Undertake quality audit on 
distribution,  diagnostics and 
pharmaceuticals to identify gaps
▪Undertake capacity benchmarking to 
identify gaps and recommendations
▪Convene relevant stakeholders and 
test findings
▪Mobilize existing enforcement agencies 
to begin working on identified 
enforcement gaps using existing 
capacity while reforms take place6-12 months 12-24 months
Assessment Planning and alignment Implementation
Milesto -
nesto 
reach▪Completion of quality audit 
▪Completion of c apacity benchmarking 
and identification of gaps and 
recommendations
▪Assessment of findings by key 
stakeholders
▪Ramp up of quality standards 
enforcement using existing capabilities▪Implementation roadmap detailing 
steps and stakeholder requirements
▪S yndication of stakeholders on next 
steps with confirmation through 
signed commitments ▪Regular reports on implementation 
progress with modification 
recommendations where necessary
▪Monitoring of quality standard 
enforcement with regular reports
▪Demonstrated improvement of 
quality in distribution,  
pharmaceutical manufacturing and 
diagnostics
▪Demonstrated improvement of 
enforcement of quality standardsKey 
stake -
holders▪Minis try of Hea lth
▪P ha rma cy a nd P ois ons  Boa rd
▪F KP M1
▪KAP I2
▪Cus toms  a uthority
▪Development pa rtners▪Minis try of Hea lth
▪P ha rma cy a nd P ois ons  Boa rd
▪F KP M1
▪KAP I2
▪Cus toms  a uthority
▪Development pa rtners▪Minis try of Hea lth
▪P ha rma cy a nd P ois ons  Boa rd
▪F KP M1
▪KAP I2
▪Cus toms  a uthority
▪Development pa rtners
1 F ederation of Kenyan P harmaceutica l Manufacturers     2 Kenya  As s ocia tion of P ha rma ceutica l Indus tries 
 35 Some contributing causes to  these challenges include  limited linkages  between agencies  
that work on health ICT ; market fragmentation and duplication of vertical e -health 
activities focused on partic ular disease areas (e.g., HIV); lack of interoperability between 
e-health systems; and insufficient technical skills at the frontline and county level to 
collect, analyze and utilize electronic health data and mobile health innovations.  
Creat ing a  national  standard  for the frequency, quality and interoperability of data 
would help to  address these challenges .  This would entail : 
■ Passing the proposed data management legislation by October 2020 ; 
■ Setting robust frameworks to enable  collaboration between agenci es; 
■ Creating governance structures and data services to ensure interoperability between 
different systems ; 
■ Designing and implementing change and performance management for all focus 
areas and health interventions ; 
■ Hiring technical experts  at every level , including count ies; 
■ Training all health workers in the minimum skills required to handle data, 
information and innovations  at an institutional level, e.g., Kenya Medical Training 
College, or at a facility level, e.g., in -service nurses.  
The above activities  would give potential private sector investors access to high  quality 
data , e.g., disease burden data , on which to base informed investm ent decisions.  
One example where this type of health data initiative has been successfully implemented 
is the  African Le aders Malaria Alliance (ALMA), which created an online tool to improve 
data quality, service levels, and commodit y availability. It conducted capability -building  
and monitor ed accountability and process management to create a data tool for 
Reproductive, Ma ternal, Newborn, and Child Health (RMNCH). The tool has been used 
in over 50% of sub-Saharan African countries to track  and improve  RMNCH  outcomes  
(Exhibit 20).  
 36 EXHIBIT 20 
 
 
Roadmap  
The r oadmap to create a high -quality digital health data platform  runs in three phases 
over three years  (Exhibit 21). 
▪Capability building :  T wo-week,  in -
country facilitation process focused on 
changing mindsets,  selecting indicators,  and 
building technical capabilities
▪Visualization of data against 
indicators : Use of existing online platform 
and data from national health and supply 
chain information systems (HMIS ,  DHIS 2) 
to produce scorecards,  maps,  and charts to 
visualize performance against priority 
indicators
▪Monitoring of accountability and 
process management :  Create and 
report on action items for subnational 
regions and indicators with performance 
below target;  Ministers of Health use the 
tool to ha ve a quarterly performance 
dialogue with national and subnational 
program managers,  holding their teams 
accountable for progress,  and triggering,  
and outbreak management
ALMA’s use of electronic data to track key maternal and child health metrics  
S ituationApproach Impact
▪Initially piloted in S ierra Leone and Mala wi,  the tool is 
now used in over 50%  of Sub -Saharan African 
countries to track RMNCH,  nutrition,  and Malaria
▪The transparency and accountability from the 
tool has helped enable substantial improvements in 
RMNCH outcomes (e.g.,  increased skilled -birth 
attendance in E thiopia,  improved vaccination rates in 
Mala wi,  restoration of RMNCH service -levels post 
E bola in Liberia)
▪Because the tool is content agnostic,  multiple countries 
are expanding the scorecards to other areas,  such as 
nutrition in Tanzania▪The African Leaders 
Malaria Alliance (ALMA),  
a coalition of 49 African 
heads of state,  needed to 
develop and launch an 
online tool to help 
ministries of health use 
epidemiological1data 
to eliminate bottlenecks 
and improve 
–F unding
–S ervice levels
–Availability of life -
sa ving commodities
–Data quality
▪The tool was piloted for 
Reproductive,  Maternal,  
Newborn,  and Child 
Health (RMNCH)
▪Use expanded to 
Malaria -elimination as 
well
1 Data relating to analysis of the distribution and determinants of health and disease conditions in defined populations 
 37 EXHIBIT 21 
 
S OURCE : Roadmap for digitizing health in E thiopia; expert interviewsImplementation roadmap to create a high -quality digital health data platformLead agencies XXX
Key 
stake -
holders▪Health Observatory team
▪Ministry of ICT
▪Ministry of Health
▪County governments
▪Office of the Deputy 
P resident▪Health Observatory team
▪Ministry of ICT
▪Ministry of Health
▪County governments of UHC 
pilot counties
▪Office of the Deputy P resident▪Health Observatory team
▪Ministry of ICT
▪Ministry of H ealth
▪Council of Governors
▪Office of the Deputy P resident
Mileston -
esto 
reach▪Dashboard for tracking 
national health data set up
▪P erformance of all counties  
(e.g.  granular disease 
burden data) tracking 
capability set up▪Data collection strategies as 
well as governance structures 
implemented in UHC pilot 
counties
▪Capability building of health 
workers around digital data 
established▪Data and capability gaps identified
▪Data governance structures and frameworks 
defined
▪Data collection process defined and set upData management legislative process in parallel with all activities
1 S upport catalyzed from e.g. Office of the Deputy P resident, Council of Governors etc.1-6 months
Set up Scale up nationally1-3 years
Build, deploy and pilot in 
UHC pilot counties
Activity▪Map out existing data systems and initiatives and 
identify data and capability gaps
▪Catalyze support1to the Health Observatory 
team for defining governance structures and 
operating models for management of data
▪Create robust framework that allows for 
collaboration amongst agencies
▪Determine change management including a 
training structure for health workers
▪Define data collection process and priority 
counties for piloting and align with 2019 census 
collection process
▪Amend private health facility licensing renewal 
regulations to include a requirement for data 
submission ▪Deploy model for national 
scale-up
▪Continue to deploy change  
management processes and 
track progress and lessons 
learnt
▪F ast-track governance and 
wa ys of working for scaling 
up
▪S cale-up training and 
data collection 
processes in the entire 
country▪P ilot developed data collection 
process in UHC pilot counties
▪Deploy data assessment (for 
accuracy etc.) and integration 
processes in UHC pilot 
counties
▪Build capabilities in select 
counties through training
▪Assess lessons learnt and make 
adjustments to approach 
before national scale -up6-12 months 
 38 County -level investment opportunities and 
actions  needed to en courage investment  
Counties are critical stakeholders in securing and driving private sector investment into 
primary healthcare . To better understand the current county -level opportunities and 
barriers to private sector investment, w e selected t hree counti es — Isiolo, Kisumu, 
Makueni — as example contexts  to explore .  In these three counties, we examined the 
enabling environment for private sector investments,  potential investment 
opportunities , and the incentives and other activities required to encourage investment.  
These counties  were shortlisted on the basis of specific criteria, including being part of 
the UHC pilot (as with Isiolo and Kisumu) and/or being an innovative primary 
healthcare  hub (as with Makueni County), and collectively being representati ve of 
different geographies and GDP sizes.   That said, these counties were studied as examples 
for this report and does not reflect any  judgment on their relative promise for private 
sector investment vis -a-vis other counties.  
Our study of these counties i ndicated that four  sub-markets offer  promising county -level 
private -sector investment  opportunities:  
■ Outpatient and maternity care . Partner with county governments to 
rehabilitate and expand value -added service offerings in outpatient facilities . 
■ Risk poo ling . Set up financially sustainable county -based health insurance 
packages as a complement/top -up to NHIF coverage . 
■ Diagnostics . Enter into agreements with counties to place and maintain 
equipment in public labs, or provid e outsourced lab testing services  for public 
health facilities . 
■ Medical education . Partner with government institutions to provide a broader 
offering o f quality training  for healthcare professions .  
Some counties are already offering incentive s, e.g., land  on which to build  medical 
educat ion institutions . But they could do much more to facilitate  investment.  For all 
four of the opportunity types  described above, counties could  conduct data collection 
and pre-feasibility studies  to jump -start private sector interest in these opportunities.   
They could also  define in advance what structure of private sector participation and 
involvement would be most helpful for the county’s health needs and viable from a 
private -sector investment perspective.  Most counties currently lack a dedicated person  
to define these business opportunities , engage with investors and other relevant bodies 
such as the PPP Unit in the National Treasury , and identify  incentives for specific deals.  
Hiring a health investments point person  would ensure that these and other i nvestment 
attraction activities move forward expeditiously.   
Details of the opportunities in each county are described below.    
 39 ISIOLO  COUNTY  
Isiolo  is located in Eastern Province . It has a population of 167,000 and GDP per capita 
of KES  95,000 (2018). It s 50 health facilities are served by 19 doctors per 100,000 
people (2012) in line with the national average of 20, and 120 nurses per 100,000 people 
(2012), which is substantially  higher than the national average of 90. Total government 
health spend for the  county is KES  613 million  (2014) , half that of the national average  in 
real terms. However, given its small population, this equates to three times the national 
average on a per capita basis ( Exhibit 22). NHIF cov erage is 20% . 
EXHIBIT 22 
 
Despite Isiolo’s high per capita spend on healthcare, the share of budget dedicated to 
recurrent expenses is 82%, slightly higher than the national average of 79%.  Recurrent 
expenditure mainly goes to sa laries and medical supplies , which should be correlated 
with population size. This suggests an opportunity for Isiolo to lower the recurrent 
proportion of its healthcare budget and redirect the funds to its healthcare development 
budget.  This would provid e the fiscal space to invest in PPPs or collaboration models, 
rehabilitate healthcare infrastructure and launch other capital projects.  Estimates 
suggest that if Isiolo were to fund its recurrent budget in line with the national average 
on a per capita ba sis (KES 1,600) , it could free up approximately KES 0.63 billion a year 
for development purposes . 
Isiolo’s healthcare budget
S OURCE : 2015/16, 2016/17, 2017/18 County Governments Budget Implementation Review Report1 Average of all counties budgetP er capita budget xx
22% 78%19% 81%
75%2015/16
2016/17
25%(1.1) 2017/183.7
3.7
4.3
+16%Isiolo County budget compared with national average1
KE S  bnPer capita total budget
KE S  ‘000
2017/18 74% 26%(2.2)8.8Other departments Health sector
Isiolo
National 
average2.16.0 8.16.5 26.0 19.5Isiolo’s per capita 
healthcare budget is ~3 
times the national a verage 
 40  
With regards to disease burden and healthcare provision, Isiolo’s outcomes are mixed . It 
outperforms the national average on child health and nutrition, poss ibly thanks to 
significant donor support. However, it falls below the  national average in maternal 
health, perhaps because of  cultural beliefs  that reject  the use of contraceptives and 
hospital  child deliver y. 
In Isiolo, the re are  four sub -markets that offer promising private -sector investment 
opportunities:  
■ Diagnostics . Isiolo ’s nine labs are not equipped to perform basic lab tests , e.g., TB 
testing . Machinery is old, and reagents  are lacking. It is seeking private -sector 
invest ment  to build its own labs.  There is a n opportunity to enter into a public -
private collaboration agreement to place and maint ain equipment, e.g. , by adopting 
the Lancet -Voi model , where Lancet Labs , in partnership with the county 
government of Taita Taveta, employed a partnership  model to upgrade the Voi 
County Referral hospital’s main laboratory and train diagnostics staff in exchange 
for a share of the laboratory revenues for four years before handing back full control 
to the county. Alternatively, lab testing services can be outso urced to private sector 
lab companies . 
■ Outpatient and  maternity care . Outpatient facilities are not easily accessible 
(some are located 60km or more apart) and are under -equipped. Public facilities 
lack maternal units and are forced to use  unequipped rooms . Isiolo  county seeks a 
private -sector partner to rehabilitate outpatient and maternity care facilities , 
creating an opportunity  for private players to offer value -added services to patients .  
■ Medical education . Isiolo has only one doctor per sub -county compared with the 
national  average  of 10 per sub -county.  Demand  for medical personnel at healthcare 
facilities  is high. The Kenya Medical Training College (KMTC) has established a 
college on donated county land that offer s one medical diploma course ( in medi cal 
records)  with plans to extend its  offering . An opportunity exists to  partner with 
KMTC to expand and complement its current offering by providing advanced 
medical training.  
■ Risk poolin g. Isiolo is a pilot county  for UHC and is required by the Governme nt 
to begin the NHIF registration by 1 November. To date , there has been  very low 
NHIF uptake, which the county attributes  to affordability  concerns . Further  
analysis is required to confirm  the root cause . The county is interested in finding a 
private -sector partner to set up and manag e a county healthcare coverage package.  
To realize these opportunities, the county needs to put three  enablers in place. First, it 
should h ire a point person to inter act with potential investors and pursue Pu blic Private 
Partn ership (PPPs). Second, it should e stablish safeguards to ensure accountability and 
transparency in PPPs to counter poor public perception, e.g., the belief that PPPs enable 
corruption. This could include ensuring public participation , consultation with the  
Ministry of Health, and sensitizing county members on the need for, and potential 
benefits of, public -private collaboration. Third, it should assess the potential of lowering  
 41 the recurrent proportion of its healthcare budget and redirect funds to the heal thcare 
development budget.  
We have developed a high -level roadmap outlining the key activities per sub -market 
required by the county to pursue private -sector investment opportunities ( Exhibit 23). 
 
EXHIBIT 23 
 
KISUMU COUNTY  
Kisumu  lies in Nyanza Province  and has a population of approximately 1.3 million and 
GDP per capita of KES 132,000 (2018). It has 250 health facilities served by 14 doctors 
per 100,000 people (2012), which is much lower  than the nation al average of 20, and 28 
nurses per 100,000 people (2012), which is less than one-third of the national average of 
90. Total government health spend is KES  2.4 billion , and NHIF coverage is relatively 
high at 32% (2014) compared to the national average of 17%.  
Kisumu’s healthcare budget allocation to healthcare is 27%, in line with the national 
average of 26%. At 94%, its allocation to recurrent expenditure is the second -highest 
Isiolo County implementation roadmap
2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
Expand KMTC offering
▪Conduct assessment of reasons behind low uptake of NHIF in IsioloSet up an affordable healthcare package ▪Assess the viability of setting up outpatient facility rehabilitation model in Isiolo
▪Develop agreements and secure investment▪Assess which P P P /P P C model to employ i.e. placement and 
maintenance versus outsourcing 
▪Implement and monitor
▪S ensitize members of the county on the need for public -private 
collaborations and potential benefits; publicize success storiesEnable county governments to pursue PPPs 
▪Hire a point person for interfacing with potential investors▪E stablish safeguards to ensure accountability and transparency in P P P s such 
as involving the MoH and establishing public participation mechanisms
▪Assess potential of lowering recurrent proportion of healthcare budget 
and redirect funds to healthcare development budgetEmploy PPP model to rehabilitate outpatient facilities and provide 
capacity building and training at scale
▪Implement and monitor
▪E ngage the private sector and assess possibility of private sector 
managing the insurance offering▪Analyze the feasibility of setting up an affordable healthcare package for
the county▪Design key roles for each party
▪S ecure funding and develop capacity for roll out▪E ngage private sector players in the medical education sectorActivities to pursue private sector opportunities
▪Hold initial discussions with KMTC to understand potential for expansion▪Award contract and monitor implementation
▪S et up the model for rehabilitating facilities and monitorEstablish PPP/PPC for diagnostics
▪Modify the model for Isiolo, develop the business case and secure 
investors▪E ngage private sector players to review the investment opportunity▪S tructure the parameters of the P P P /P P C and run RFP  process
▪Design a new coverag e package and operating framework with 
private sector participation
▪Review county policies to identify those that are restricting investment and 
work towards making necessary amendment sDiagnosticsSub-market
Medical 
education
Risk poolingOutpatient & 
maternity care
Cross -cutting 
enablers 
 42 amongst all counties ; the national average is 79%. This leaves just  6% of the b udget for 
investment in development/expansion projects , suggesting a  need to consider  re-
allocating a portion of the budget from recurrent expenditure to development 
expenditure.   
Disease burden and healthcare provision  outcomes are mixed . Metrics such as nutrition, 
child health and maternal health  are higher than the  national average, while  indicators 
for HIV, malaria and tuberculosis  are below average . 
As a UHC pilot count y, Kisumu  has already completed all governance and planning 
steps , including  setting  up Oversight and Steering Committees, and developing UHC 
roadmaps and implementation plans. However, implementation is delay ed as funds have 
not yet been  disburse d by the Government.  
Three  of the sub-markets offer opportunities for private  sector investme nt:  
■ Diagnostics . Kisumu offers  a limited range of tests through its public facilities . 
Reagent stock -outs are frequent, and tests are poor in  quality. Private labs are 
unaffordable for much of the public and therefore inaccessible  many patients.  An 
opport unity exists to enter into a public -private collaboration agreement to place 
and maint ain equipment  by, e.g. , adopting the Lancet -Voi model or outsourcing lab 
testing services.  
■ Outpatient and maternity care . Kisumu lacks infrastructure  and proper 
equipment  in many  outpatient and maternity care facilities. One potential model 
would be to engage the private sector in rehabilitating outpatient and maternity 
care facilities , which would then be able to offer  additional  value -added services to 
patients.  
■ Risk poo ling . Kisumu remains a relatively low -income county , with 51% of its 
population living on less than  $2 a day. With less than 1% of the population covered 
by private insurance and only 31% under NHIF coverage, most people have no 
safety net for severe illne sses that tend to be very  expensive. A n opportunity exists 
to collaborat e or partner with the county to provi de catastrophic insurance 
coverage.  
Four  enablers at the county level would support the above  investments . Kisumu County 
should hire a point person  to interact with potential investors and pursue Public Private 
Partnership (PPPs) ; establish mechanisms to ensure accountability and transparency in 
PPPs by ensuring public participation and consultation with the Ministry of Health ; 
identify and assess bu siness cases /return on investment (ROI) f or public -private 
collaboration; and assess potential of lowering recurrent expenditure proportion and 
redirect funds to development expenditure.  
We have developed a high -level roadmap outlining the key activities p er sub -market 
required by Kisumu  to pursue private -sector invest ment opportunities  (Exhibit 24). 
  
 43 EXHIBIT 24 
 
MAKUENI COUNTY  
Makueni County in the Eastern Province has a population of approximately one m illion 
and GDP per capita of KES 103,000 (2018). Its 230 health facilities are served by 15 
doctors per 100,000 people (2012), lower than the national average of 20, and 27 nurses 
per 100,000 people (2012), less than one -third of the national average of 90 . Total 
government health spend is KES 1.9 billion and NHIF coverage is 27% (2014), 10% 
higher than the national average.  
At 28%, Makueni’s healthcare development budget allocation is slightly higher than the 
national average of 26%. Its development expend iture spiked in fiscal year 2016/2017 
because of increased investment in primary care facilities and Makueni Care , a county -
driven insurance scheme that covers hospital care . 
Disease burden and healthcare provision outcomes are higher than the national ave rage,  
possibly because of strategic partnerships to establish 57 new care and treatment centers 
and 72 new prevention of mother -to-child transmission sites.  
However, Makueni’s challenges include inadequate  healthcare facilities that are widely 
dispersed an d poorly equipped. AMREF and Philips are working with the county to set 
Kisumu County implementation roadmap
2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
Enable county government to pursue PPPs▪Implement and monitor▪S et up the model for rehabilitating facilities and monitor
▪Assess potential of lowering recurrent proportion of healthcare budget 
and redirect funds to healthcare development budgetActivities to pursue private sector opportunities
Provision of county wide catastrophic insurance coverage 
▪Hire and train a point person to interface with investors▪Involve MoH and design public participation mechanisms▪Assess which P P P /P P C model to employ i.e. placement and 
maintenance versus outsourcing 
▪Modify the model for Kisumu, develop the business case and secure 
investors▪Award contract and monitor implementation
▪Conduct assessment of reasons behind catastrophic occurrences
▪Analyze the feasibility of setting up an affordable catastrophic insurance
package for the county ▪Assess the viability of setting up outpatient facility rehabilitation model in Isiolo
▪E ngage the private sector and assess possibility of private sector 
managing the insurance offeringEmploy PPP model to rehabilitate outpatient facilities and provide 
capacity building and training at scale
▪Design a catastrophic coverage package and operating framework with 
private sector participation▪E ngage private sector players to review the investment opportunity
▪S ecure funding and develop capacity for roll out▪S tructure the parameters of the P P P /P P C and run RFP  processEstablish PPP/PPC for diagnostics
▪Hold monthly meetings, coordinate county engagement with investors and 
respond to investor requests for support
▪Review county policies to identify those that are restricting investment and 
work towards making necessary amendments▪Identify and assess business cases for public -private collaborationDiagnosticsSub-market
Risk poolingOutpatient & 
maternity 
care
Cross cutting 
enablers 
 44 up a PPP  in which Philips will upgrade the equipment at three outpatient facilities, 
AMREF will train the healthcare personnel, and the county will manage policy, 
regulation and qualit y. In addition , Makueni Care faces huge sustainability and 
feasibility challenges since it is heavily financed by the county government allocations , 
and there is reportedly a high rate of adverse selection (i.e., patients who only sign up 
once they are alr eady sick) . There is also a concern about the low rate of uptake of 
Makueni care, with only 10% of households covered.  
In Makueni County , four types of investment opportunities are promising :  
■ Outpatient and  maternity care . Makueni has few  high -quality out patient 
centers and they are often underequipped . The county seeks to engage with private -
sector investors to rehabilitate its primary healthcare facilities. Although the 
Philips -AMREF project is still in the feasibility stages, there is an opportunity to 
study the model and assess potential for larger scale -up. 
■ Medical education . As noted above, Makueni ’s health sector  is grossly 
understaffed , particularly for the nursing cadres . To address this problem, the  
county has donated 50  acres of land to AMREF  to establish a university to train 
doctors and nurses. An opportunity exists to partner with AMREF  and the county  to 
provide training for health professions . 
■ Risk poolin g. Makueni has prioritized UHC  by establish ing Makueni Care for 
residents who cannot affor d the NHIF. However, due in part to high poverty levels, 
there is little uptake (10% at the end of 2017) , with patients only pay ing for Makueni 
Care when they fall sick  and hence jeopardizing the financial sustainability of the 
scheme . The financial underp innings and performance of Makueni Care should be 
carefully evaluated, and its design should be adjusted to increase enrollment  and 
improve financial sustainability .  Care should also be taken to identify potential 
private sector participation opportunitie s, such as top -up coverage that could be 
offered by private sector to layer on top of the county -offered basic package.  
■ Distribution . Historically, t he cold chai n distribution infrastructure in Makueni 
has largely  been provided by donors. Recently, Makueni  county committed to  taking 
ownership of the vaccines cold chain.  This could be structured as a outsourced 
contract  to the private sector . 
To realize  these opportunities, Makueni must ensure three  enablers are in place. It 
should hire a point person to in teract with potential investors and pursue Public Private 
Partnership (PPPs) ; establish mechanisms to ensure accountability and transparency in 
PPPs by ensuring public participation and consultation with the Ministry of Health; and 
identify and assess busi ness cases /return on investment (ROI)  for public -private 
collaboration.  
We have developed a four -year roadmap outlining the key activities per sub -market 
required by Makueni  to pursue private -sector investment opportunities (Exhibit 25). 
 
  
 45 EXHIBIT 25 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR T HE P RIVATE SECTOR TO ENGAGE AT  COUNTY 
LEVEL  ACROSS KENYA  
The private sector can engage with the counties in  several ways to  invest in primary 
healthcare  across Kenya. To capture the coun ty-level investment opportunities, 
companies will need to  be prepared to allocate time and staff resources to  collect the  
necessary  data (e.g., on current and potential volumes, pricing) needed for business case 
development, as these data are not available  typically from county gover nments or third -
party sources. As a general rule, potential investors should engage a count y early in the 
investment process  and conduct thorough feasibility studies . In addition, m ost of the 
opportunities will require a public tendering process (either fo r outsourced contracts or 
PPPs), so companies should be prepared to prepare and submit bids as part of these 
processes.  
Exhibit 26 shows the actions that companies will need to undertake to pursue the 
identified county -level investment opportunities.  
 
Makueni County implementation roadmap
2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
▪Hold discussions with private sector based on assessment
▪Conduct study on business case and feasibility in Makueni County
▪Determine how to partner with identified private sector
▪Implement and monitor
▪Hire and train a point person to interface with investors▪Implement and monitor
▪Hold monthly meetings, coordinate county engagement with investors and 
respond to  investor requests for supportEvaluate Makueni Care
▪Identify and assess business cases for public -private collaboration Activities to pursue private sector opportunities
▪Analyze vaccine supply chain in the countyPartner with training providers for establishment of a medical university
▪Conduct rigorous assessment of Makueni care including costing structure▪Implement scale -up / replication of the model
▪Analyze assessment on potential opportunities
from making the insurance cover profitable and accessible to the poor▪Hold initial discussions with training providers on setting 
up university and roles of each party
▪Identify and engage with potential private sector investorsAssess opportunity to scale up/ replicate PPP model to rehabilitate 
outpatient facilities and provide capacity building and training at scale
▪E ngage private sector players and training providers for potential collaboration 
and definition of deal type
Explore models involving contracting private sector for cold chain▪Assess the achievements, challenges and barriers of 
the model and potential of replicating
▪E ngage potential private sector investor
▪Assess proposed cold chain distribution structure
▪Run tender for private sector to provide cold chain services   ▪Find private sector partner and structure investment 
▪Monitor service levels and performance management of the resulting system
Enable county government to pursue PPPs
▪Review county policies to identify those that are restricting investment and 
work towards making necessary amendments▪Involve MoH and design public participation mechanismsMedical 
educationSub-market
Risk pooling
DistributionOutpatient & 
maternity 
care
Cross -cutting 
enablers 
 46 EXHIBIT 26 
 
County -level implementation roadmap for private investors
2019 2020 2021 2022
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
▪Meet county officials to express interest and present business case for provision of services
▪Conduct negotiation and contracting▪Await RFP  release, develop and submit RFP  response to the county▪Agree with county on either P P P  or RFP  arrangement and follow (see below
▪Await evaluation of RFP  responses and contract award notification▪E ngage private sector players to review the investment opportunity▪Hold discussions with county health and education officials on setting up of a medical school
▪Modify the model for the county, develop the business case and clarify roles  and 
financial contributions
▪Financial close▪Await approval from the P P P  steering committeePartner with e.g. Isiolo and/or Kisumu counties for placement of 
diagnostic equipmentActivities to pursue county investment opportunities
▪Conduct visits to education centers to understand feasibility and develop business case,
including understanding the market size, affordability and willingness to pay
Follow the full RFP processEmploy PPP model to rehabilitate outpatient facilities and provide 
capacity building and training at scale
▪Hold discussions with county lab officials on placement of lab equipment
▪Conduct lab visits to understand feasibility and develop business case, including 
understanding tests offered, current state of facility equipment, current and potential 
volumes of lab tests, and pricing and develop business case
▪Meet county officials to express interest and present business case for a P P P▪S et up the model for rehabilitating facilities and monitor
Follow the full PPP processEstablish a medical university or college in e.g. Isiolo and/or Makueni
▪Await RFP  release, develop and submit RFP  response to the county▪Agree with county on either P P P  or RFP  arrangement and follow (see below)
▪Assess the viability of setting up outpatient facility rehabilitation model in the county( ies) 
of interest , including assessing willingness to innovate, market size and path to financial sustainabilityMedical 
education
Diagnostics
PPP processOutpatient & 
maternity 
careSub-market1
1 Risk pooling not included as counties need to analyze and enact reforms to define structure of private sector participation b efore private sector can usefully develop 
business casesRFP process 
 47 Stakeholder syndication  
We have s yndicat ed the investment opportunities and enablers described in this report 
with a wide range  of experts and more than 30 stakehold ers. Based on their input, we have 
refined and adapt ed the roadmaps to fit the reality on the ground and build on existing 
efforts .  
The experts and stakeholders  consulted includ e representatives from:  
■ Executive Office of the President ; 
■ Office of the Deput y President;  
■ Ministry of Health;  
■ Universal Health Coverage Secretariat ; 
■ Council of Governors ; 
■ PPP Unit  of National Treasury;  
■ Higher Education Loans Board ; 
■ Kenya Healthcare Federation ; 
■ Healthcare insurance  providers;  
■ Private sector investors in Kenya  primar y healthcare;  
■ County Chief Executive Committee Members;  
■ County Chief Officers of Health Services and Sanitation ; 
■ Deputy Directors of  Preventive and Curative Health;  
■ Deputy Directors o f Logistics and Administration;  
■ NGOs and Foundations;  
■ Faith-based organiz ation s; 
■ Other health officials;  
■ Patients ;  
■ Employees at healthcare providers.  
In addition, we presented parts of this work and received feedback at two fora:  
■ The Healthcare CEO Roundtable, co -hosted by McKinsey and the Kenya Healthcare 
Federation ; 
■ The SDG Partnership Platform Finance and Business Modeling Workshop . 
Further work by the UN’s SDG Partnership Platform will be needed to continue 
syndicat e the results of this work to  build buy -in, reflect the evolving healthcare 
landscape , and implement  the roadm aps detailed in this report.  
 