 
 
 
 
 
 
Reassessing Expectations for 
Blockchain and Development  
Michael Pisa  
Policy Fellow, Center for Global Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CGD Note  
May 2018  
1 Growing interest in whether and how blockchain technology can help address a variety of 
social and economic challenges has given rise to a community of thinkers, innovators, and 
policymakers working to explore the technology’s implications for social impact and 
development.  
On one level, things are happening quickly in this space. Over the last two year s, the largest 
development organizations have begun to examine how using the technology might help 
them meet their goals. This includes the World Bank, which established a Blockchain Lab 
in 2017; the United Nations, which reports that 15 UN entities are ca rrying out blockchain 
initiatives; the Inter -American Development Bank, which is exploring the use of 
blockchain as a platform for asset registries; and USAID, which recently a published a 
primer on the topic.1 Several humanitarian non -profit organizations  (NPOs) are also 
evaluating blockchain as a potential platform for aid distribution and developing their own 
proofs -of-concept. This is all happening as the number of start -ups pitching ideas 
continues to grow and distributed ledger models continue to evol ve. 
Despite these advances, however, the number of pilot projects underway remains quite 
small. While this could be just a matter of timing —many of the organizations mentioned 
above are now reviewing project proposals —it may also reflect hurdles to impleme ntation 
that have received insufficient attention to date.  
Given that blockchain technology is still in an early stage of development, it makes sense 
that most discussions about its use have focused on its potential rather than obstacles. Too 
often, however, boosters of the technology have overstated its capabilities and failed to 
consider obstacles to adoption. This imbalance has led to unrealistic expectations about 
what blockchain solutions can do, how easy they will be to implement, and how quickly 
they can scale, if at all. The result has been a widening gap b etween expectations and 
reality that has naturally led to growing skepticism.  
The best way to address these doubts is to take them head on and to rebalance the 
conversation away from starry-eyed accounts of the technology’s promise and towards the 
obstacl es that are likely to slow implementation and the steps that must be taken to 
overcome them.  
This brief essay explores a key but often overlooked hurdle to using blockchain solutions, 
which is the complexity that decentralized solutions necessarily introduce. At times, the 
benefits of such solutions appear to exceed the added cost of complexity but often they do 
not. With this tradeoff in mind, the paper considers two use cases, digital ID and health 
supply chain management. Finally, the paper offers recom mendations about how the 
development community can shift the conversation in a more useful direction.  
Understandable excitement leads to unrealistic 
expectations  
Enthusiasm over the potential of blockchain technology to address a wide variety of social 
and  economic challenges is largely based on the notion that it allows for “trustless 
collaboration.” This widely held view is captured in a recent report co -published by the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the company Blockchain , which 
states that “the decentralized, transparent, verifiable nature of [blockchain] means we can 
trust people and organizations precisely because trust is no longer an issue.”2  
The notion that the technology can substitute for trustful relationships is, in most cases , 
misguided. By solving the “double spend” problem, the original blockchain outlined by 
Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 removed the need to rely on trusted intermediaries to oversee 
the transaction of digital assets. However, when the problems we want to solve in volve 2 changes in the real “off -chain” world, the need for human agency, and therefore trust, 
remains.3 For example, creating a blockchain -based land registry does not remove the 
need to trust the bureaucrats who upload land titles because, like all databas es, blockchain 
does nothing to improve the reliability of inputs. At best, the technology can enhance trust 
in some relationships by increasing the transparency and immutability of transactions and 
records.  
It is also important to recognize that, while ea rly excitement about blockchain focused on 
the transformative potential of public, permissionless networks like Bitcoin and Ethereum, 
interest and investment has shifted strongly towards permissioned ledgers, in which only 
verified parties can participate.  These closed networks are much more likely to help 
centralized actors achieve efficiency gains than they are to lead to their displacement.  
The Cost of Complexity  
As noted above, much of blockchain’s appeal rests on the often -mistaken notion that it can  
remove the need to rely on trusted third parties. Yet even when the assumption holds, 
moving from a centralized to a decentralized solution always comes at the cost of added 
complexity.  
This increased complexity can take different forms. At the most basi c level, moving from a 
system in which a single actor verifies who owns what to one in which many actors share 
this responsibility requires using a consensus protocol, even the most efficient of which 
adds delay.  
Likewise, moving from a system in which a trusted third -party stores data in a centralized 
“silo” to one in which data is stored on a distributed network often requires adding layers 
of encryption to control who can see what. While some of these encryption approaches are 
no more complex than those  used by centralized databases, others, like those that rely on 
zero knowledge proofs, are more computationally intensive.4 In addition, the cost of 
permanently storing documents on an ever -growing blockchain will inevitably force 
organizations to develop off -chain storage solutions, which will further complicate how 
data is managed and secured.  
Additional layers of complexity may be required depending on use case. For example, 
using blockchain as a platform for digital ID raises the question of how individ uals manage 
their private keys.  
Perhaps the biggest challenges raised by shifting from centralized to decentralized models 
relate to legal and regulatory considerations. In the first instance, companies interested in 
using the technology must determine how they can comply (if at all) with existing data 
security and privacy laws. In the second, policymakers must consider whether to change 
existing laws to facilitate the use of decentralized models. As Graglia and Mellon note, 
“blockchain is unusual in that it is a social technology, designed to govern the behavior of 
groups of people through social and financial incentives. It is therefore inherently 
political.”5 For that reason, developing reforms aimed at supporting decentralized 
approaches could take a significant amount of time and be contentious.  
Whether the benefits of using a decentralized model exceed the added cost of complexity 
ultimately depends on the use case in question. In recent years, a variety of decision 
models have been created to help guide the process of weighing these tradeoffs (a recent 
iteration, this one produced by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, is presented in 
Figure 1) .6 In general, these suggest that, in the vast majority of cases, organizations are 
better off using simpler (i.e., centralized) database models. Below we explore two 
development use cases through this tradeoffs lens.  3  
4 Use Case #1: Providing a platform for refugee IDs  
1.1 billion people, roughly 1 in every 7 in the world, lack proof of their legal identity. This 
problem disproportionately affects children and women fr om rural areas in Africa and 
Asia, and is even more acute for the world’s more than 21 million refugees.7 Without legal 
identification, it can be difficult to access health and education services, open a bank 
account, get a loan, and vote.8 Governments hav e also become increasingly interested in 
providing digital  legal ID, as recent advances in technology have made it easier to do so, and 
as the share of business conducted online grows.  
At the same time, there is growing concern worldwide about the vulnera bilities associated 
with the storage and use of personal data by governments and companies. Many believe 
that both problems could be solved by using a self -sovereign identity (SSI) approach to ID. 
This model aims to shift control to individuals by allowing  them to “store their own 
identity data on their own devices, and provide it efficiently to those who need to validate 
it, without relying on a central repository of identity data.”9 Until recently such a solution 
was technically infeasible, but blockchain  technology appears to make it possible.  
There is great interest in the development community about whether the SSI model could 
help to improve the lives of the world’s poorest, with some even suggesting that it could 
help relieve the migrant crisis.10 Som e of the organizations now exploring the technology’s 
potential to this end include Microsoft, Accenture, UNHCR, and ID2020. 11 12  
Under the generic SSI model, individuals use a digital wallet on a blockchain to store 
certifications from trusted authorities  (e.g., banks, credit rating agencies, hospitals, 
passport authorities) asserting that they possess certain attributes. For example, each 
person could store the following certified claims in her wallet: “credit rating over 700,” 
certified by a credit ratin g agency; “is over 21,” certified by a government; “has blood type 
B” certified by a hospital. When the user must show that she has certain attributes to 
service providers (e.g., when she must prove that she is older than 21 to enter a bar; or that 
she has  a credit rating above 700 to obtain a loan), she can share them without sharing any 
additional personal information.  
Storing verified claims on a blockchain create several potential benefits for users. The first 
is control: SSI could enable a person to ma nage both who she shares her personal 
information with and how much information she shares. Such a system could also be more 
convenient, since it could allow people to provide verified information with the touch of a 
button rather than having to access and submit a wide variety of documents. Finally, the 
near -impossibility of tampering with records on a blockchain could provide greater 
confidence about their authenticity.  
Proponents of the model cite several ways that SSI models could improve refugees’ wel l-
being. First, storing ID documents and important records on a blockchain could make it 
easier for refugees to verify their identity and obtain appropriate services if they relocate 
(e.g., a refugee who can provide a trusted immunization record could avoi d being given the 
same vaccine in different camps).13 Using an SSI model could also allow refugees who are 
unable to obtain a government ID to build a composite identity through multiple claims. 
Similarly, they could use their digital wallets to store a his tory of their economic 
transactions, which would allow them to develop a credit history that could be used to 
access financing.  
While these features are promising, the model also has serious limitations. Most 
importantly, because the SSI approach continue s to rely on trusted third parties —to 
provide the certifications stored in each person’s digital wallet and store the data on which 
those claims are based —it does nothing on its own to solve the core challenge of providing 
foundational IDs. In addition, th e portability of IDs generated and stored on a blockchain 5 depends entirely on how many organizations (either on or off the network) are willing 
accept them. For that reason, getting multiple governments and development 
organizations to agree on a single SS I approach is a prerequisite to developing an effective 
model.  
The SSI model also introduces complexities that may make it difficult to scale. This 
includes challenges related to key management. Since a user’s identity is tied to her 
private/public key pair, a person who loses a key will need to start the identity proofing 
process from scratch to reestablish their digital identity.14 The irrevocability of data stored 
on the blockchain also raises concerns about data privacy, which is crucial when dealing 
with refugees, who are often politically persecuted. It is therefore important for software 
developers creating ID solutions to take a “privacy by design” approach.15 
In sum, while excitement about the SSI approach and the ways it could improve the lives of 
the world’s most vulnerable people is understandable, the model’s complexity is a major 
barrier to adoption.  
Use Case #2: Managing Health Supply Chains  
The World Health Organization estimates that one in ten medical products used in low- 
and middle -income countries is either substandard or falsified (SF), with most reported 
cases (42 percent) coming from Africa.16 This problem stems in part from poor supply 
chain management, which prevents local health clinics from knowing the provenance of 
the medical supplies they use. Improving the ability to “track and trace” the movement of 
medical goods across the supply chain would help to address this problem.  
Interest in improving health supply chains is not limited to developing countries. The US 
Drug Supply Chain Security Act passed in 2013 calls for the development of an electronic, 
interoperable system to identify and trace the movement of prescription drug s distributed 
in the country by 2023. The European Union passed similar legislation in 2016. Both 
initiatives have spurred investment in possible solutions, including blockchain.  
Following the lead of companies with large logistical operations like Walmar t and Maersk, 
the pharmaceutical industry is now exploring the technology’s potential for its own supply 
chains. Over the last year, several initiatives that aim to use blockchain to meet track and 
trace regulations have been announced, including The MediL edger Project and a 
collaboration between DHL and Accenture.17 18 
The idea of using blockchain technology as a platform for supply chains holds great 
promise. By providing a single, tamper -resistant ledger on which transactions can be 
viewed by all actors wi th appropriate permissions, the technology could reduce many of 
the frictions and vulnerabilities in existing supply chain networks. Greater visibility over 
the movement of goods could reduce the costs and time associated with reconciliation, 
minimize the potential for counterfeiting, expedite recalls, and aid inventory 
management.  
Supply chains also meet many of the criteria set forth in Figure 1 regarding when a 
blockchain solution may be useful, including the involvement of multiple actors who need 
both  “read” and “write” database access, the desirability of a tamperproof log of 
transactions, and a potential inability to trust a single actor in the supply chain to store the 
data. And while the technology cannot fully substitute for trust between supply c hain 
partners (e.g., those at the end of the supply chain must still trust pharmaceutical 
manufacturers to provide accurate information about the ingredients they use), it can 
enhance it by providing “a single source of truth” that has been agreed to by al l actors on 
the network.  6 Recording health supply chain data on a shared ledger could also unlock new capabilities 
not possible under the current model in which data remains siloed in individual 
companies. For example, pharmaceutical companies could analyze  aggregated data to 
predict stock -outs before they happen and better monitor disease outbreaks in real -time. 
Using a blockchain platform in combination with electronic sensors at different stages of 
the supply chain could also help to monitor and verify th at vaccines have been stored at 
appropriate temperatures.  
Perhaps the most critical obstacle to achieving this vision is meeting the pharmaceutical 
industry’s demand for data privacy. To date, manufacturers and distributors have been 
unwilling to share com mercially sensitive data with one another. Solving this problem 
requires the use of permissions secured by encryption, which adds a layer of complexity. 
For example, the company Chronicled (which runs The MediLedger Project) is using zero 
proof theorems wh ich allow “transactions to be publicly verifiable without having to 
contain sensitive information.”19  
Before a blockchain can serve as a supply chain platform, several prerequisites must also 
be met. The most basic is the need to assign a unique identity ( i.e., serial number) to each 
product in the supply chain through a process called “serialization.” While this process 
sounds simple, it requires a high degree of coordination around a set of (ideally global) 
standards. The next step is making sure that all actors on the supply chain have the ability 
to scan products and make use of the data provided. Most experts believe that establishing 
industry-wide serialization will take years to complete.20  
Another necessary prerequisite is a supportive legal environm ent. Experts in the highly 
regulated health sector are just beginning to consider how decentralized models fit with 
the existing legal framework and what reforms might be needed to enable new 
approaches. To state the obvious, companies are unlikely to use a blockchain -based 
platform until they have confidence that it meets these regulations. At the same time, 
policymakers will only pursue reform once they have developed expertise about 
decentralized models. This again points to the need for patience, as wel l as education.  
Despite these challenges and the likely long period of transition, supply chain 
management appears to be an area where the benefits provided by blockchain technology 
could exceed the cost of complexity. Determining this will ultimately dep end on 
information gleaned from conducting pilot projects.  
Conclusion  
Whether using a decentralized governance model is worth the added cost of complexity 
depends entirely on the attributes of the case in question. While the costs appear to 
outweigh the be nefits in most instances, there are a few areas in which blockchain 
technology could help us address longstanding challenges in new and more effective ways.  
Given the development community’s interest in exploring the technology, it is important 
to set a c ourse that allows for effective experimentation and learning. Here are a few 
suggestions for how to move the discussion forward in a more useful direction:  
• Get specific . There is a glut of “blockchain for development” surveys, including this 
essay, and none are terribly useful.21 Since blockchain models and the value they 
provide differ greatly across use cases, analysis should focus on specific 
applications. This will require pairing sector specialists with technical experts, 
ideally with a policy person  in the mix.22  7 • Get real. Blockchain boosters often exaggerate the technology’s capabilities and 
overlook hurdles to adoption, leading to unrealistic expectations. Similarly, there 
is a tendency for blockchain enthusiasts to assume that centralized solution s are 
always second -best (or worse) and that trust is always lacking. These assumptions 
should be questioned in every use case.  
• Get data (and share it). Blockchain start -ups are often quick to publicize their pilot 
project “successes,” while failing to pr ovide metrics to support their claims. 
Without this data, the development community will struggle to determine what 
approaches are most likely to work and at what cost. Organizations that fund pilot 
projects should require the start-ups they partner with to collect and report this 
data.  
• Cultivate patience. In many ways, getting the technology right is the easy part. The 
more difficult challenges involve getting multiple actors to agree to a common set 
of standards and establishing legal and regulatory compliance. Doing both will 
require answering complicated questions with little precedent like who owns data 
stored on a blockchain, who is liable, and what is needed for the data to be 
accepted by all parties. For this reason, going from pilot to scale will take much 
longer than is commonly acknowledged. The development community can 
accelerate this process by conducting more pilots, collecting and sharing more 
data, and having more conversations about what an enabling regulatory 
framework could look like.  
 
I am grateful to the following people for taking the time to review this paper and provide their insights: 
Susan David Carevic, Alan Gelb, Rachel Alexandra Halsema, Paul Nelson, Stela Mocan, John Polcari, 
and Aaron Sparks.  
 
1 Nelson, Paul. USAID. “A Primer on Blockchain.” https://www.usaid.gov/digital -
development/digital -finance/blockchain- primer  
2 Blockchain Company and  the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) “The Future is 
Decentralized. Blockchains, Distributed Ledgers, & the Future of Sustainable Development.” 2018. 
https://www.blockchain.com/whitepaper/index.html  
3 Steve Wilson makes this point in a 2017 speech here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UH5 -
wvfVph4&feature=youtu.be&t=348  
4 Samman, George. “The Trend Towards Blockchain Privacy: Zero Knowledge Proofs.” Coindesk . 
September 12, 2016.  
5 Graglia, J. Michael and Christopher Mellon. “Blockchain and Property in 2018: At the End of the 
Beginning.” Working Paper for 2018 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, March 19 –23, 
2018.  
6 Meunier, Sebastien. “ When do you need blockchain? Decision models. ” Medium , August 4, 2016 
https://medium.com/@sbmeunier/when- do-you-need -blockchain -decision -models -a5c40e7c9ba1  
7 World Bank, ID4D. Identification for Development: Making Everyone Count . May 4, 2017. 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/332831455818663406/WorldBank -Brochure -ID4D -021616.pdf  
http://www.unhcr.org/ en-us/figures- at-a-glance.html  
8World Bank. 2018.  Principles on identification for sustainable development: toward the digital age (English) . 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/213581486378184357/Principles- on-identification -for-
sustainable -development -toward -the-digital -age  
9 Lewis, Antony. “A gentle introducti on to self -sovereign identity.” Bits On Blocks , May 17, 2017. 
https://bitsonblocks.net/2017/05/17/a -gentle -introduction -to-self-sovereign -identity/  
10 Warden, Staci. “Can Bitcoin Technology Solve the Migrant Crisis?” Wall Street Journal , June 8, 2016. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/can- bitcoin -technology -solve -the-migrant -crisis -1465395474                                                                      8                                                                                                                                                                                          
11 Accenture. “ Accenture, Microsoft Create Blockchain Solution to Support ID2020.” June 19, 2017.  
https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/accenture -microsoft -create -blockchain -solution -to-
support- id2020.htm  
12 http://www.unhcr.org/blogs/id2020- and -unhcr -host -joint -workshop -on-digital -identity/  
13 Thanks to Susan David Carevic, IT Officer, World Bank Group, for providing this example.  
14 Hall, Blake. “5 Identity Problems Blockchain Doesn’t Solve.” Medium , July 6, 2017.  
https://medium.com/@blake_hall/5 -identity -problems -blockchain -doesnt -solve -ed4badb94398   
15 https:// ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-data -protection/privacy -by-design/  
16 World Health Organization. “ 1 in 10 medical products in developing countries is substandard or 
falsified .” Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. November 28, 2017. 
http://www.who.int/en/news -room/detail/28 -11-2017 -1-in-10-medical -products- in-developing -
countries- is-substandard -or-falsified   
17 Accenture. “DHL and Accenture Unlock the Power of Blockchain in Logistics.” March 12, 2018. 
https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/ dhl-and -accenture -unlock -the-power -of-blockchain -in-
logistics.htm   
18 MediLedger. https://www.mediledger.com/   
19 MediLedger. “The Mediledger Project: 2017 Progress Report.”  Medi Ledger . February 2018. 
https://uploads -
ssl.webflow.com/59f37d05831e85000160b9b4/5aaadbf85eb6cd21e9f0a73b_MediLedger%202017%20
Progress%20Repor t.pdf  
20 Whyte, Joe. “ Pharmaceutical Serialization: An Implementation Guide .” Rockwell Automation . 
October 2017. 
http://literature.rockwellautomation.com/idc/groups/literature/documents/wp/lifesc- wp001_ -en-
p.pdf  
21 There are of course exceptions. Two of the better surveys are:  Zambrano, Raul. “Blockchain:  
Unpacking the disruptive potential of blockchain technology for  human development .” International 
Development Research Centre . August 2017. https://idl -bnc -
idrc.dspacedirect.org/bitstream/handle/10625/56662/IDL -56662.pdf  . And: United States Agency for 
International Development . “Primer on Blockchain.” Paul Nelson. Washington:  United States 
Agency for International Development , 2018. https://www.usaid.gov/digital -development/digital -
finance/blockchain- primer  
22 Thanks to Rachel Alexandra Halsema, IT Officer, World Bank Group, for emphasizing this point.  