 
 Digital Development  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Digital Development (formerly Development Informatics) working paper series 
discusses the broad issues surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, 
information systems, and information and communication technologies in the 
process of socio -economic development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 8 5 
 
Systematic Evaluation of 
Platform Work Against Decent 
Work Standards: 
Development of a New 
Framework  and Application in 
the Global South  
 
RICHARD HEEKS , MARK GRAHAM, PAUL 
MUNGAI, JEAN -PAUL VAN BELLE & JAMIE 
WOODCOCK  
 
 
2020  
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-1-905469 -90-1 
 
Publishe r: Centre for Digital Development  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdd@manchester.ac.uk         Web: https://www.cdd.manchester.ac.uk/  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Platform Work in the Global South  ................................ ...........................  3 
C. A Framework for Decent Work Standards  ................................ .................  4 
D. Research Methods  ................................ ................................ ....................  8 
E. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 9 
E1. BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  9 
E2. FAIR PAY ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  10 
E3. FAIR CONDITIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 11 
E4. FAIR CONTRACTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 11 
E5. FAIR MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................  12 
E6. FAIR REPRESENTATION  ................................ ................................ .............................  13 
F. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 14 
F1. CONCLUSIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  15 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  17 
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
1 
 Systematic Evaluation of Platform Work 
Against Decent Work Standards: 
Development of a New Framework and 
Application in the Global South  
 
Richard Heeks1, Mark Graham2, Paul Mungai3, Jean -Paul Van Belle3 and Jamie 
Woodcock4 
 
2020  
 
Abstract  
 
Platform work, also known as gig work, is a fast -growing trend, estimated to involve  
up to 40 million workers in the global South.  Celebrated in some quarters, growth of  
the gig economy has also been a cause for concern about the nature of jobs being 
crea ted.  Yet, while it is the focus for a growing body of research, there has been a 
lack of systematic frameworks to evaluate this type of labour  against decent wor k 
standards.  
 
This paper reports on the development of such a framework, based on five princip les 
of fair pay, conditions, contracts, management and representation.  Following its 
development, the framework was applied via worker interviews to 11 digital labour 
platforms in South Africa covering ride -hailing, delivery, domestic and digital work.  I t 
finds positive evidence around pay, safety interventions, communication and worker 
interaction for some workers and platforms.  But the framework also exposes 
workers paid less than minimum wage and working very long hours, incorrect 
employment classific ation, and absence  of collective representation.  
 
Alongside its analytical value for understanding emergence of the gig economy, the 
framework can also be used in practice to inform platform eco -system stakeholders 
as a basis for improvements in worker pay  and conditions.  
                                                      
1 Global Development Institute, University of Manchester, UK  
2 Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, UK and The Alan Turing Institute, UK  
3 CITANDA, Department of Information Systems, University of Cape Town, South Africa  
4 People and Organisatio ns, The Open University , UK Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Digital technologies are central – indeed, all -consuming – to debates about the 
future of work (Aroles et al. , 2019; ILO, 2019a; World Bank, 2019).  While much of 
the discussion has focussed on digital’s impact on the qua ntum of work , there has 
also been debate – especially in relation to platform -based labour  – about the 
quality of emerging work  (Norton, 2017; Spencer, 2018).  Our paper speaks to this 
latter debate: evaluating the quality of platform -based work.  We focus  particularly 
on the context of the global South given that is where by far the majority of the 
world’s work  is located and yet, in relative terms, less research has been undertaken.  
 
Platform work – work organised and mediated by digital labour platforms such as 
Uber and Upwork – is growing fast.  For example, in the global South, overall 
numbers are uncertain but one set of estimates puts the figure at between 30 -40 
million workers with growth rates up to 30% per year (Heeks, 2017; Heeks, 2019).  
This exp ansion has been matched by a growing research literature.  This literature 
identifies a number of benefits of digital labour platforms.  The platforms themselves 
can help to address information failures and inefficiencies in traditional labour 
markets (Dro uillard, 2017).  Clients benefit from lower costs and higher service 
standards (Accenture, 2017; Dreyer et al. , 2017).  Alongside this, though, has been a 
more negative counter -narrative.  This has involved platforms (for example, avoiding 
tax payments: Ol bert and Spengel, 2017) and clients (for example, being cheated by 
workers: Kaganer et al. , 2013).  
 
The literature presents a similarly mixed view in the debate on quality of platform 
work.  Gains are reported for workers such as higher incomes than previo usly 
earned, greater flexibility of working hours or location, and more objective 
management processes, among others (Surie and Koduganti, 2016; Heeks, 2017).  
Yet other research findings point to over -long work hours, lack of social protection 
payments, a nd an atomisation of the workforce that prevents collective voice (Hunt 
and Machingura, 2016; Kashyap and Bhatia, 2018; Wood et al. , 2018).  
 
This debate echoes and in some cases directly refers to decent work standards, such 
as those promoted by the Intern ational Labour Organization (ILO, 1999).  Yet, to 
date, there has been a lack of  primary research that systematically evaluates 
platform work against such standards.  It is this gap which the current paper seeks to 
fill; developing a new decent work framew ork of specific relevance to platform work, 
and then using that as the basis for primary data -gathering on the experiences of 
platform workers in order to provide a systematic understanding of the nature of 
such work.  
 
The next section reviews in more deta il the evidence on platform work, looking 
particularly at the global South, and then explains the framework of decent work 
principles that was developed for the current research.  Following an explanation of 
fieldwork methods, the findings from this fieldw ork are presented.  The paper ends 
with a discussion of those findings and conclusions about the framework, about Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
3 
 practical interventions to improve platform work standards, and about the future 
research agenda.  
 
B. Platform Work in the Global South  
 
Durin g the past few years, there has been growing interest in the future of work; 
understood particularly in terms of the impact on employment of the rising presence 
of digital technologies (ILO, 2019a; World Bank, 2019).  One element of this has been 
discussio n about the impact of robotics and other forms of industrial automation on 
numbers employed in manufacturing, given the importance of the industrial sector 
particularly in the global South.  
 
Another element – the focus here – is the growth in digital labou r platforms; defined 
as a set of digital resources including services and content that manage value -
creating interactions between consumers and individual service -providing workers 
(adapted from Constantinides et al. , 2018).  We divide the work undertaken via such 
platforms into two types.  Physical gig work involves location -bound physical activity 
such as taxi driving, food delivery and house cleaning via platforms such as Uber, 
Deliveroo, Rappi and GoJek.  Digital gig work involves location -independent d igitally -
centred  activity such as data entry, translation and web development via platforms 
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk, Upwork and Freelancer.1 
 
Looking just at the global South then, as noted above, such work already employs up 
to 40 million gig workers – some 1.5% of the workforce – and growth rates are rapid 
(Heeks, 2019).  Hence, the growing interest in this new form of employment; an 
interest reflected in an emergent research literature which has looked at the spread 
of digital gig work to the  global South (e.g. Mill, 2011) and more latterly at the 
spread of physical gig work (e.g. Surie and Koduganti, 2016).  
 
As noted in the Introduction, this research has evidenced many benefits of platform 
work.  On digital gig work, there is evidence that g lobalisation of online tasks has 
brought new jobs to the global South (Codagnone et al. , 2016).  Most evidence, 
though, relates to quality not quantity of work .  There is evidence that pay rates for 
platform workers are higher than prevailing norms; for ex ample, GoJek  motorcycle 
taxi riders  in Indonesia earning two -three times more than previously (Ford and 
Honan, 2017).  There is evidence that workers find greater flexibility and autonomy 
in platform work: for example, Upwork workers in India, “appreciated  being able to 
operate from home and avoid difficult commutes as well as escaping from the micro -
politics, supervisory controls and interpersonal issues that accompanied 
organisational life [ and] enjoyed the flexibility of setting their own daily schedule  
and pace” (D’Cruz and Noronha, 2016:50).  
 
At the same time, though, there is evidence of problems with platform work.  
Uber/Ola drivers in India were found to endure “fatigue, stress, hunger and sleep 
deprivation” in order to earn enough to pay off loans t aken out on the assumption of 
a certain level of income from platform work (Kashyap and Bhatia, 2018).  Few if any 
platform workers report social protection provision by the platform: for example, Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
4 
 large -scale surveys of digital gig workers report no platfo rms paying for sick leave, 
health/life insurance or pension contributions (Berg, 2016; Berg et al. , 2018).  Set 
within a broader frame, platform work is therefore seen as a trade -off: providing 
work  opportunity and flexibility for developing country worker s but at the cost of 
chronic precarity and inequality (Heeks, 2017).  
 
While there is a growing body of evidence of both pros and cons to platform work, as 
yet, there has been very little research that has used a systematic framework to 
analyse platform wor k.  Perhaps because of the relative novelty of this type of work, 
some of the literature is based on secondary research (e.g. Ford and Honan, 2017; 
Schmidt, 2017).  Where primary evidence -based, the research has been inductive in 
its approach, drawing out themes bottom -up from primary data (e.g. D’Cruz and 
Noronha, 2016; Surie and Koduganti, 2016; Graham et al. , 2017a; Pongratz, 2018); or 
it has asked questions about a set of issues but without a clear and structured 
derivation (e.g. Berg et al. , 2018, Ilav arasan et al. , 2018).  There are thus research 
agenda calls for more systematic work: “We will need frameworks for understanding 
the impacts of the transformations described here” (Norton, 2017:28 -29) including 
structured frameworks that would allow compar isons across countries and across 
time (O’Farrell and Montagnier, 2019).  
 
Alongside this, there are action agenda calls for decent work standards to be 
extended to apply to digital labour platforms (ILO, 2019a).  There has certainly been 
engagement with th e idea of decent work in the research literature on platform 
work (Hunt and Machingura, 2016; D’Cruz, 2017; Noronha and D’Cruz, 2017; Berg et 
al., 2018).  This research is based on primary evidence -gathering, and has given a 
sense of both pros and cons in relation to the idea of decent work.  However, as for 
the more general body of research on platform work in the global South, this has not 
yet applied any systematic framework of decent work standards – decent work is 
seen as a general agenda rather than a  specific structure for analysis.  In the next 
section, we therefore set out such a structure.  
 
 
C. A Framework for Decent Work Standards  
 
The origins of decent work standards lie in the work of the International Labour 
Organization during the 20th century  but crystallise with their 1999 launch of the 
concept of “decent work” (ILO, 1999) which was later defined as “work that is 
productive and delivers a fair income, security in the workplace and social protection 
for families, better prospects for personal development and social integration, 
freedom for people to express their concerns, organize and participate in the 
decisions that affect their lives and equality of opportunity and treatment for all 
women and men” (ILO, 2019b).  Over succeeding years, this idea of decent work was 
formalised into a series of indicators which then came to be understood as 
benchmarks or standards (ILO, 2013; see also Anker et al. , 2003; Ghai, 2003):  
 Employment opportunities  
 Adequate earnings and productive work  
 Decent working t ime Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
5 
  Combining work, family and personal life  
 Work that should be abolished  
 Stability and security of work  
 Equal opportunity and treatment in employment  
 Safe work environment  
 Social security  
 Social dialogue, employers’ and workers’ representation  
 Economic a nd social context for decent work  
 
In order to create the decent work standards against which platform work could be 
assessed, our starting point was these eleven ILO standards but we wanted to 
modify them because of two concerns.  The ILO standards are broad in their 
coverage and sometimes  seen as rather complex and difficult to implement (Korner 
et al. , 2009, Burchell et al. , 2014).  We therefore drew from two global -leading 
frameworks which have operationalised the ILO standards into a rather simpler set: 
the Ethical Trading Initiative Ba se Code (ETI, 2014) which is an internationally 
recognised code of labour practice; and the labour components of the widely -used 
SA8000 certification scheme, developed by Social Accountability International (SAI, 
2014).  
 
The ILO standards are also traditio nal in their coverage, having been developed 
before digital technologies played a significant role in shaping the nature of work.  
We reviewed the literature on platform work in the global South described in the 
previous section and broader sources on plat forms and work (particularly De 
Stefano, 2015; Cherry and Poster, 2016; Lehdonvirta, 2016; Graham et al. , 2017; 
Huws, 2017; Schmidt, 2017).  From this, we found issues being raised – around 
algorithm - rather than human -led management, around use of data, around 
employment status – which did not readily fit into the eleven ILO standards.  In order 
to ensure that these platform -specific issues were recognised, we also reviewed four 
platform -specific standards:  
 the “Frankfurt Declaration on Platform -Based Wor k” (FairCrowdWork, 2016) 
signed by North American and European trade unions;  
 a related development of this Declaration, applying its ideas to undertake a 
survey and rating of digital gig platforms (FairCrowdWork, 2017);  
 a voluntary code of conduct for crow dwork set by the German crowdsourcing 
platform Testbirds (2017) and supported by Deutscher Crowdsourcing Verband 
e.V (German Crowdsourcing Association); and  
 Richard Heeks’ (2017) “Decent Work and the Digital Gig Economy” synthesis of 
contemporary literatur e on standards for platform -based digital gig work.  
 
The review categorised the contents of these other standards into eight themes, 
drawing out a series of potential sub -elements that could be used to evaluate 
platform work; as shown in Table 1.  
 
In works hops held in Geneva  (co-hosted by the ILO and UNCTAD), Bangalore and  
Johannesburg during 2018, we asked stakeholders representing workers, platforms, 
government and civil society to discuss and prioritise the themes and sub -elements.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
6 
 From this emerged fiv e “Fairwork principles”2: a simple framework of decent work 
standards that could be readily operationalised for evaluation of platform work.  
These were necessarily not as comprehensive as the initially -identified themes, let 
alone the original ILO decent work standards.  But they did represent a tripartite 
perspective on what was most important in applying the concept of decent work to 
digital platforms.  As shown in Table 2, each of the five principles was broken into 
two measurable elements: a “basic” le vel representing a minimum level of decency, 
and an “advanced” level that builds beyond this.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
7 
 Platform Work 
Theme  ETI SA8000  Frankfurt  
Declaration  FairCrowdWork 
Review  Crowdsourcing 
Code of Conduct  Heeks  Sub-Elements  
Pay Living wage  Living wage  Minimum wage  Pay and non -payment  Fair payment  Adequate earnings  Minimum wage; Living wage; 
Pay terms; Regulation of 
non-payment  
Conditions  Employment freely 
chosen; Working hours 
are not excessive; 
Working conditions are 
safe and hygienic; 
Regular employment is 
provided  No child, forced, or 
compulsory labour; 
Limits on working 
hours/days; Safe and 
healthy working 
environment   Experiences with  
technology; Quality 
and availability of tasks  Motivating and 
good work; Clear 
tasks and 
reasonable timing; 
Freedom and 
flexibility  Employment 
opportunities; Career 
development; Work 
processes; Working hours; 
Health and safety  Information about work 
process; Health and safety; 
Regularity of employment  
Contracts   
 Comply with laws; 
Clarify employment 
status; Social 
protection  Changes to terms and 
conditions; Warranty of 
work  Tasks in 
conformance with 
the law; 
Clarification on 
legal status  Social prote ctions; Other 
legislation and rights; 
Stability of work; 
Employment status  Employment status; 
Compliance with law; 
Contract terms; Liability and 
insurance; Social protection  
Communication     Contact with 
employers; Contact 
with workers  Constructive 
feedback and open 
communication   Lines and quality of 
communication  
Management  No discrimination is 
practised; No harsh or 
inhuman treatment is 
allowed  No discrimination; 
No abusive 
disciplinary practices  Dispute resolution  Reviews, ratings, and 
evaluations  Respectful 
interaction; 
Regulated approval 
process and 
rework  Discrimination; Respect, 
privacy and dispute 
resolution  Discrimination and equality; 
Management guidelines; 
Ratings and reviews; Dispute 
resolution; Account 
deactivation  
Governance  Code through supply 
chain; Reporting  SA8000 management 
system  Transparency    Platform governance; 
Accountability  Transparency; Accountability  
Use of Data      Data protection 
and privacy   Data collection, use, access, 
protection and privacy  
Representation  Freedom of association 
and right to collective 
bargaining  Freedom of 
association and right 
to collective 
bargaining  Collective 
bargaining    Freedom of association; 
Social dialogue/collective 
bargaining  Worker voice; Freedom of 
association; C ollective 
representation and 
bargaining  
  
Table 1: Summary of Decent Work Themes for Platform WorkManchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
8 
  
Fairwork 
Principle  “Basic” Indicator  “Advanced” Indicator  
Fair Pay  Pays the minimum wage  Pays the minimum wage including costs  
Fair Conditions  Meets comparative health and safety 
regulations  Actively protects health and safety (e.g. 
positive identification of customers)  
Fair Contracts  Clear terms and conditions  Offers contracts that reflect the true nature of 
the employment relationship  
Fair 
Management  Provides a clear channel of 
communication to workers involving 
the ability to appeal disciplinary 
procedures or deactivation  Can eviden ce equality in the management 
process and/or any collection of data must be 
justified with a clear purpose and only with 
explicit informed consent  
Fair 
Representation  Includes freedom of association and 
worker voice mechanisms  Recognises collective body t hat can undertake 
collective representation and bargaining  
 
Table 2: Summary of Fairwork Principles and Indicators  
 
 
D. Research Methods  
 
We then set out to operationalise these principles; using them as the basis to evaluate 
platform work in South Africa.  Fieldwork was undertaken from November 2018 to May 
2019 focusing on all of the main South Africa -based platforms that the team could identify.  
Ultimately, eleven platforms were covered, with number of worker interviews indicated in 
brackets:  
 Delivery platforms: Bottles (6), Mr D Food (Mr Delivery) (4), OrderIn (6), UberEats (11), 
Wumdrop (3)  
 Domestic work platforms: Domestly (4), SweepSouth (7)  
 Ride -hailing platforms: Bolt (Taxify) (8), Uber (11)  
 Digital work platforms: NomadNow (5), Upwork (5)  
 
We set a target of interviewing six workers from each platform, selected randomly by hiring 
the services of a worker and then undertaking an interview with them; providing a 
compensation payment to cover their time.  For some platforms, it was difficult to reach 
workers due to limited numbers being available within the locations in Cape Town and 
Johannesburg where interviews took place.  For other platforms, contact with platform 
workers was a by -product of research team everyday activity, and more than six were 
interviewed.  Thus, in total, 70 workers were interviewed across 11 platforms; roughly 40% 
in Johannesburg, 60% in Cape Town.  
 
Interviews were designed in relation to the five Fairwork principles and ten indicators plus 
some background questions about  demographics and prior work, and more general 
questions about key problems they faced or changes to work they would like to see.  
Although not reported in detail here, we also contacted platforms seeking evidence in 
relation to the principles and indicato rs; evidence that was used to corroborate worker 
interview data.3 
 
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
9 
 E. Findings  
 
E1. Background  
 
In terms of basic demographics, 20% of the interviewees were female, representing around 
half of digital gig workers and almost all domestic workers, but with other segments very 
heavily male dominated: we came across no female taxi drivers even when travelling 
without interviewing; and only one of the 30 delivery workers was female.  There was 
therefore a strong gender skew in all but digital gig work.  
 
The ave rage age of interviewees was 32 years old, with taxi drivers tending to be older than 
average, and the three other types of worker being somewhat younger than average.  Only 
three of the interviewees identified as “coloured”4; the remainder were black Afri cans5.  Of 
those who provided details about their nationality, roughly one -third were South African, 
one-third were Zimbabwean, and one -third were other African nationalities, particularly 
Congolese.  A mix of South African and non -South -African nationalit ies was seen across all 
four types of platform.  
 
On average, workers had worked for their platform for just over one year, with the longest 
period being 4.5 years and the shortest two months. Three -quarters only worked for the 
one platform.  Of those worki ng for multiple platforms, three -quarters were delivery drivers 
and they represented half of the delivery drivers.  
 
In terms of previous work, for only two interviewees – both non -South -African students – 
was platform work their first job; though one-quarter – including most domestic workers – 
had been without a job and looking for one just prior to joining the platform.  Just under a 
half – including all but four of the South African interviewees – had worked in the same type 
of work prior to join ing the platform: this was particularly found for digital and domestic 
work and, indeed, a number of these interviewees were still mixing platform and non -
platform work in parallel.  One -fifth – all in delivery work – had previously worked in the 
same type  of work for a different platform.  Just under one -third – taxi drivers  and non -
South Africans  especially  – had worked in a different field: seven as security guards; five in 
manual trades such as mechanics or electricians.  
 
It was the attraction of higher  income that was the main rationale given for joining the 
platform: half of interviewees mentioned this6.  Just over one quarter of interviewees cited 
greater flexibility of hours; for example, to allow time to be with their families.  Half of those 
from o utside South Africa mentioned the difficulty of getting any sort of work, at least 
formal work, because of their status, and hence the difficulty of finding alternatives to their 
platform -based labour .  All of these motivations were reflected in a Malawian interviewee 
who had shifted to working during the day and evening as a delivery rider which he 
regarded as significantly better than his previous job, working night shifts as a security guard 
and bei ng paid R150 (c.US$10) a day in cash because he had no formal work permit as 
compared to the R260 (c.US$18) paid to South Africans in the same job.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
10 
 E2. Fair Pay  
 
At first sight, pay levels for platform workers appear reasonable, averaging R14,300 
(c.US$1, 000) per month7.  This is around one -third lower than the average formal business 
sector salary of R21,190 recorded at the same time (Wasserman, 2019) but twice as large as 
gross national income per capita of just under US$500 (World Bank, 2019).  Average pay 
levels were R54 (c.US$4) per hour; significantly above the R20 (c.US$1.5) per hour minimum 
wage8.  However, these dropped to R34 (c.US$2.5) per hour net income once work -related 
costs were taken into account.  A couple of taxi drivers and one domestic worker were 
earning below minimum wage after costs, but this was true of half of the delivery drivers, a 
few of whom were losing money on longer delivery drops as costs exceeded payment.  In 
total, roughly one quarter of interviewees were earning less than  minimum wage in net 
terms.  
 
There were significant differences between types of work.  The data in Table  3 can be 
summarised as follows: digital work is well paid with low costs but workers found it hard to 
make a full -time living; taxi driving is fairly well paid but has high costs and very long 
working hours; delivery work is not very well paid and has low costs but very long working 
hours; domestic work is not very well paid and has low costs and work available via the 
platform is somewhat limited.  The se sectoral characterisations were also borne out by 
interviewee responses when asked if they were getting enough work via the platform.  All or 
most of the workers on five platforms said they were not; reflecting the failure of the 
platform to generate en ough customers to enable workers to earn a living from that 
platform alone.  This affected one -third of domestic workers, half of deliverers, and 80% of 
digital workers.9 
 
Platform Type  Working 
Hours Per 
Week 
(mean)  Gross Weekly 
Income 
(mean)  Work -Related 
Weekly Costs 
(mean)  Gross Income 
Per Hour 
(mean)  Net 
Income 
Per Hour 
After Costs 
(mean)  
Delivery  72 hours  R2,228  R633  R32 R22 
Domestic Work  27 hours  R801  R220  R30 R20 
Ride -Hailing10 73 hours  R5,855  R3,414  R86 R43 
Digital Work  5 hours  R765  R217  R106  R91 
  
Table 3 : Pay Level by Type of Platform/Work  
 
One can also identify two temporal issues.  Hourly earnings were often relatively low 
because of the very long hours being worked.  Excluding those working part -time (e.g. due 
to being students) or unable to find sufficient work due to lack of sufficient clients on the 
platform, the mean number of hours worked per week was 67 (this includes time waiting for 
tasks but excludes travel -to-work time).  One -fifth were working more than 90 hours per 
week.  There is also a longer -term dynamic with, for example, a number of delivery workers 
complaining that their income had been dropping as platforms changed their fee and 
payment structures and/or as additional workers were hired onto the platforms and thus 
demand -supp ly ratios began to fall.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
11 
 E3. Fair Conditions  
 
Fair conditions particularly concerned platforms’ actions to mitigate work risks.  Digital work 
is insulated from South Africa’s context and, for digital workers, the main risk of their work 
was non -payment by  clients.  This hardly figured for the other workers who were more 
concerned with physical risks.  By far the major one was crime; specifically robbery.  This 
was reported as a key risk by two -thirds of respondents, including at least four who had 
already been robbed while working.  Accidents were seen as a key risk by half of the 
workers; including 80% of delivery workers, four of whom had already had accidents.  
Problems with customers ranked third, followed by a few reporting job -specific risks: the 
weat her for delivery riders; dangerous pets and allergies for domestic workers; police fines 
for taxi drivers.  
 
The response of platforms to these risks was mixed.  The poorest performers – including 
four of the five delivery platforms – did have a facility where workers could contact the 
platform in case of a problem but they did not take measures to ensure a safe working 
environment.  Six of the platforms did seek to provide this: simple health and safety 
training, provision of equipment and, in the case of  Upwork, holding client payments in 
escrow to reduce the chances of non -payment.  Three platforms – SweepSouth, Uber and 
UberEats – went beyond the basics to actively improve working conditions.  Uber, for 
example, had multiple documented policies on worki ng conditions, and drivers themselves 
corroborated this: basic albeit very brief safety training, limits on working hours, a “panic 
button” on the app that could be used in an emergency11, insurance in case of accidents, 
provision of security at sites of co nflict with meter taxi drivers, and covering the costs of 
both passengers who ran off without paying and police fines if vehicles are impounded for 
not having a taxi license.  None of the platforms provided sick pay or holiday pay or 
pensions.  
 
E4. Fair Co ntracts  
 
Under this principle, we looked at the  contractual terms and conditions under which a 
worker is employed , given these  represent the core foundation for work.  Yet workers on six 
of the eleven platforms reported that they neither knew nor possessed  the terms and 
conditions of their work .  One driver explained that their terms and conditions were 
regularly updated and they were then presented with these when they logged on to the app 
in order to start work:  
“I didn't read it because it's too long and  it's so fine because you have to zoom in on 
your phone that it's difficult to read … I had a choice of reading 22 pages or working 
and because you have to earn money for your family, you accept it, so I don't know 
what was in there".  
Like other workers, h e was unable to access a copy of his terms and conditions in order to 
check them.  Even for the other five platforms, one quarter of workers were not clear about 
the nature or whereabouts of their terms and conditions.  
 
All of the workers were identified a s independent contractors rather than employees.  
However, Section 200A of South Africa’s Labour Relations Act (DoL, 2002:115) states that a Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
12 
 worker “is presumed, regardless of the form of the contract, to be an employee, if any one 
or more of the following  factors are present:  
a) the manner in which the person works is subject to the control or direction of [ the 
platform ];  
b) the person’s hours of work are subject to the control or direction of [ the platform ];  
c) in the case of a person who works for [ a platform ], the person forms part of that 
[platform ];  
d) the person has worked for that [ platform ] for an average of at least 40 hours per month 
over the last three months;  
e) the person is economically dependent on the [ platform ] for whom he or she works or 
renders serv ices;  
f) the person is provided with tools of trade or work equipment by the [ platform ]; or  
g) the person only works for or renders services to one [ platform ].”12 
 
Setting aside digital work (given no interviewees were finding enough work to create a 
living/dep endency), 43 of the remaining 60 only worked for one platform and were 
economically dependent on it; the remaining 17 (mostly delivery drivers) also worked for 
one of the other platforms.  One could make an argument that the workers were part of the 
platfo rm; certainly that is how they are universally perceived by clients and other external 
stakeholders – as an “Uber driver”, as an “OrderIn deliverer”13.  Even more clearly, all but 
one of the interviewed workers was working more than 40 hours per month for t heir 
platform, and it was readily arguable that they worked on the basis of control or direction of 
the platform app, and that the app represented “tools of the trade”.  For those engaged in 
physical gig work, then, the status allotted to them by the platf orm – independent 
contractor – did not match their status through interpretation of the law: employee.  
 
For digital workers, as noted, extent of work, hours, economic dependency and working for 
only one platform were not present in those interviewed.  Howe ver, one could still argue 
that the way in which they worked was directed and even controlled to a significant degree 
by the platform, and that the platform formed an essential “tool of trade”.  So even for 
these workers, they can be seen as mis -classified  by the platform.  
 
E5. Fair Management  
 
Fair management was understood  firstly  in terms of channels and processes for workers to 
communicate with management, including appealing decisions: that these should be not 
just documented but also working in practi ce.  This was the case at a basic level for all but 
one of the platforms; that workers felt they could readily communicate with platform staff 
via chat/messaging (WhatsApp or similar) or phone call or email, with the majority also able 
to visit a physical office in case of problems that needed to be discussed.  
 
This positive view of communication channels eroded somewhat when asking workers 
about their specific experiences of using them – on four of the platforms it appeared that 
central offices were understaffed, so responses were slow.  For five workers, this w as 
particularly problematic because they had been robbed or involved in an accident and did 
not get help from the platform.  It would also be reasonable to say that even the good 
communication was more “fair administration” than “fair management”: where wo rkers Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
13 
 had tried to use these channels to raise concerns about pay or conditions, they did not find 
them responsive.  
 
A management  issue raised in literature on platform work  is the unfair deactivation of 
workers  (Codagnone et al. , 2016; Silberman,  2017).  In practice, o nly nine of the 70 workers 
had had some form of warning or suspension or deactivation, and they seemed to regard 
the process for resolution as reasonable.  Our sampling approach would not catch those 
who had been permanently excluded from the  platform but we asked workers about 
examples of this.  Twelve gave such examples but their narrative was always that this was 
the worker’s fault: persistent lateness, cancellation of orders or rudeness to customers, 
letting someone else use their profile,  working in parallel for another platform when this 
was explicitly forbidden.  
 
As noted in Table 2, fair management also involved assessment of  whether platforms had 
active measures to protect workers’ data and to prevent discrimination.  Only two of the 
platforms did.  In relation to data, only four (c.6%) of the workers felt they understood and 
had given informed consent to use of their data.  In relation to discrimination, just over 80% 
of workers had had no experience that they regarded as discriminator y; for example, in 
terms of their nationality or race.  Of the twelve who had, most related to abuse of non -
South African delivery drivers from drunk customers or from taxi drivers shouting at them 
about their riding.  None of this was reported to their pl atform.  More intrinsic issues were 
found in domestic work which has been the habitual site for racialised treatment of black 
South African workers (Hunt and Machingura, 2016): more than half of them reported such 
experiences but most had not reported this  to the platform for fear of negative 
repercussions.  
 
E6. Fair Representation  
 
The fair representation principle covers the ability of workers to collectively organise and be 
heard.  None of the digital workers met up with others or was in a chat group wit h other 
workers, and only two were in touch with other workers in any way (one in a Facebook 
group, one with friends who did the same type of work).  This is consistent with the relative 
isolation of digital gig workers reported elsewhere (Graham et al. , 2017b).  For other 
workers, one -fifth were not in contact with other workers but the remaining majority were 
in chat (e.g. WhatsApp) groups or face -to-face contact or both.  Delivery and taxi drivers 
often had known waiting areas where they would congregate , and most were also in a 
platform -specific chat group which was also nationality -specific in the case of larger 
platforms.  Domestic workers rarely if ever had an opportunity to physically meet as a 
group, and they were further constrained because their W hatsApp groups were run by the 
platform.  
 
Setting aside non -work chat, the majority of discussions were about everyday aspects of 
work, largely outside the control of the platform: tips on good areas or times to get more 
business, handling difficult custom ers, warnings about traffic or police problems, help with 
repairing cars or bikes, letting others know about an accident, etc.  Only a minority related 
more directly to the work conditions set by the platforms; with levels of payment 
dominating well above all other topics.  This was also reflected when we asked what Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
14 
 changes workers would like to see: pay (including payment systems and income more 
generally as reflected in level of demand) was by far the main concern, followed by safety 
and then interface de sign.14 
 
Despite these groupings of workers and their ability to collectively discuss work -related 
topics, official collective representation to platforms was almost non -existent.  On only one 
platform were workers aware that there was an officially -sanctio ned mechanism for 
workers to contact managers about issues.  There were documented mechanisms, in theory, 
on three other platforms but none of their workers were aware of, or had used that 
mechanism.  
 
None of the platforms recognised a union or any other c ollective body for representing 
workers – though one claimed to support the development of such a body.  The only 
organisation that resembled a collective entity was the South African e -Hailing Association 
but only three of the 20 taxi drivers had heard of  it and none of them was minded to join 
the Association.  This reflected a more general view on unions: only three of the 70 
interviewees – all of whom were experiencing problems with their platform – expressed an 
interest in joining a union.  
 
 
F. Discussi on and Conclusions  
 
We saw earlier that prior research on platform labour in the global South, even if more 
inductive than deductively systematic, has portrayed a mix of positives and negatives in 
relation to this type of work.  Our application of the five  Fairwork principles and ten 
thresholds provides further, and systematic, evidence for this mix , summarised in Figure 1 . 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Number of the Eleven Platforms Achieving Fairwork Principles  
 0 2 4 6 8 10 12Fair Representation (Advanced)Fair Representation (Basic)Fair Management (Advanced)Fair Management (Basic)Fair Contracts (Advanced)Fair Contracts (Basic)Fair Conditions (Advanced)Fair Conditions (Basic)Fair Pay (Advanced)Fair Pay (Basic)
No. PlatformsManchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
15 
 On the positive side, these digital labour platforms are pr oviding some workers, particularly 
immigrants to South Africa, with work  they might otherwise struggle to obtain.  Pay for 
most, even after deducting work -related costs, is above the minimum wage.  A (small) 
majority of the platforms was taking at least so me measures to ensure a safe working 
environment.  The great majority of workers were happy to be seen as independent 
contractors.  They were readily able to make contact with staff at the platform, and felt that 
the way platforms dealt with deactivation w as reasonable.  More than 70% were in some 
form of worker grouping that provided a forum to discuss work -related issues.  
 
On the negative side, work  in the platform economy is heavily gender -skewed towards men 
and both gender - and racially -skewed within sectors.  One quarter of our sample take home 
less than minimum wage, with a number saying that income was dropping over time, and 
with 40% not obtain ing sufficient work through their platform.  Yet many were working very 
long hours: the average is roughly 50% longer than the maximum 45 -hour working week 
specified by South Africa’s Basic Conditions of Employment Act (RSA, 1997).  Only three of 
the eleve n platforms were taking active measures to improve working conditions, and even 
on these workers still faced contextual risks of crime, accidents and problems with 
customers.  The majority of workers were unclear about their terms and conditions of 
employm ent and unable to access written details of their employment.  Every one of the 
workers appeared to be incorrectly – quite possibly illegally – classified as an independent 
contractor when they were a de facto employee of the platform.  Yet they received n one of 
the benefits of employee status, including no sick pay, holiday pay, pension contributions, 
etc.  They did not feel that platforms were responsive to more serious issues they faced – 
racial discrimination, robbery, accidents – and only a tiny number  had given properly 
informed consent to the platform’s use of their data.  On ten of the eleven platforms, there 
was no effective mechanism for these and other work -related issues to be collectively raised 
with managers.  
 
This therefore evidences the broad er patterns of platform work  (Heeks, 2017; Anwar and 
Graham, forthcoming).  Platforms are providing workers with work  opportunities and 
flexibility: jobs that are new and often better -paid or more formalised than prior 
employment; with some level of autono my of working hours.  But the work is chronically 
precarious: uncertain and insecure because of the lack of employment rights and the lack of 
fair management and representation.  And the work is embedded in a structurally unequal 
system.  Value accrues mos t to platforms, then clients, and least to workers in relative 
terms.  The very real physical risks of working in South Africa are largely borne by workers, 
not platforms.  Information about workers and work processes is held by the platform and 
inaccessib le to workers.  Platforms control “the institutions and organisation of work 
including legal oversight, terms of service, and work context and management design … 
They also control the technical systems into which work and work organisation are 
embedded.” (Heeks, 2017:18).  Workers control none of this, and their ability to influence it 
is limited by the absence of fair representation.  
 
F1. Conclusions  
 
Despite the global and rapid growth of platform work, there has been a lack of systematic 
schemata for th e evaluation of such work.  The research reported here is original in Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
16 
 developing a new framework for such evaluation, based on decent work standards.  
Applying this in a global South context, it provides a structured evidence set that exposes 
both the posi tive and negative aspects of platform work in developing countries.  The 
framework has simplified and specified decent work standards in order to make them 
straightforward to operationalise.  At the same time, the content is relatively 
comprehensive given the foundation on prior frameworks plus the tripartite inputs provided 
by the framework development workshops15.  The framework therefore provides a basis for 
evaluation throughout the gig economy that other researchers, government agencies, 
worker associat ions and, indeed, platforms themselves can use.  Given the clarity and 
structure of the framework, it will enable comparisons to be made over time and between 
different contexts and platforms.  
 
The framework is not only an analytical device but can also ha ve practical application.  For 
example, through its identification of the way in which platform work in South Africa falls 
significantly short of decent work standards, use of the framework creates an imperative for 
intervention.  Three main forms of inter vention can be identified: structural, regulatory and 
informational.  
 
The first two lie outside the ambit of the framework application.  Structural interventions 
could include support for formation of worker associations or even gig economy unions, 
through  to creation of platform cooperatives, as has occurred in some cities of the global 
North (Borowiak and Ji, 2019).  Regulatory interventions would involve action by the state to 
fill the institutional voids that enable some of the decent work shortfalls to  occur.  This 
would look particularly at ways in which substantive legal provisions can be made applicable 
to platform workers, through law, collective bargaining, policy and voluntary codes.  
 
Informational interventions would seek to provide information t o labour market 
stakeholders – clients, workers, competing platforms, government, etc. – on the nature of 
working conditions on individual platforms.  The Fairwork framework shown in Table 2 and 
Figure 1 readily lends itself to this because each element can be awarded one point, 
providing a decent work score out of ten for each platform.  Though not reported here, this 
has been undertaken based on the fieldwork described above including evidence -gathering 
from platforms plus also desk research (see Fairwo rk, 2019).  The information within the 
rating score for each platform is intended to influence altered behaviour among 
stakeholders.  
 
Our paper reports the first application of this new decent platform work schema.  A first 
step for further research will t herefore be application of the schema in other countries; both 
global South and North.  As noted above, this will allow ready comparison across platforms 
and countries; for example, to help understand the influence of national context on the 
nature of plat form work.  Application of the framework over time will allow longitudinal 
insights: whether, for example, growing regulation of platform work is improving standards 
or growing competition is driving down standards.  These broader applications will also 
allow the principles to be revisited: to understand whether they are universally applicable or 
whether they require modification; for example, when applied to different types of 
platforms and/or as platforms themselves change over time.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
17 
 References  
 
Accentur e (2017), Amplify You: Technology for People  (Dublin: Accenture).  
Anker, R., I. Chernyshev, P. Egger, F. Mehran and J.A. Ritter (2003), ‘Measuring Decent Work 
with Statistical Indicators’, International Labour Review  142, 2, 147 -178.  
Anwar, M.A. and M. Gra ham (forthcoming), ‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Freedom, 
Flexibility, Precarity and Vulnerability in the Gig Economy in Africa’, Competition and 
Change . 
Aroles, J., N. Mitev and F.X. de Vaujany (2019), ‘Mapping Themes in the Study of New Work 
Practice s’, New Technology, Work and Employment  34, 3, 285 -299.  
Berg, J. (2016), Income Security in the On -Demand Economy: Findings and Policy Lessons 
from a Survey of Crowdworkers  (Geneva: International Labour Organization, Geneva).  
Berg, J., M. Furrer, E. Harmon , U. Rani and M.S. Silberman (2018), Digital Labour Platforms 
and the Future of Work: Towards Decent Work in the Online World  (Geneva: 
International Labour Organization, Geneva).  
Borowiak, C. and M. Ji (2019), ‘Taxi Co‐Ops versus Uber: Struggles for Workpl ace Democracy 
in the Sharing Economy’, Journal of Labor and Society  22, 1, 165 -185.  
Burchell, B., K. Sehnbruch,  A. Piasna and N. Agloni (2014), ‘The Quality of Employment and 
Decent Work: Definitions, Methodologies, and Ongoing Debates’, Cambridge Journal of 
Economics  38, 2, 459 -477.  
Cherry, M.A. and W.R. Poster (2016), ‘Crowdwork, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Fair 
Labor Practices, in F.X. Olleros and M. Zhegu (eds), Research Handbook on Digital 
Transformations  (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar), pp. 291 -312.  
Codagnone, C., F. Abadie and F. Biagi (2016),  The Future of Work in the ‘Sharing Economy’. 
Market Efficiency and Equitable Opportunities or Unfair Precarisation?  (Seville: EC Joint 
Research Centre).  
Constantini des, P., O. Henfridsson and G.G. Parker (2018), ‘Introduction —Platforms and 
Infrastructures in the Digital Age’, Information Systems Research  29, 2, 381 -400.  
D’Cruz, P. (2017), ‘Partially Empowering but not Decent? The Contradictions of Online 
Labour Marke ts, in E. Noronha and P. D’Cruz (eds), Critical Perspectives on Work and 
Employment in Globalizing India  (Singapore: Springer), pp. 173 -195.  
D’Cruz, P. and E. Noronha (2016), ‘Positives Outweighing Negatives: The Experiences of 
Indian Crowdsourced Workers’ , Work Organisation, Labour & Globalisation  10, 1, 44 -63. 
De Stefano, V. (2015), The Rise of the 'Just -In-Time Workforce': On -Demand Work, Crowd 
Work and Labour Protection in the 'Gig -Economy'  (Geneva: International Labour 
Organization).  
DoL (2002), Amende d Labour Relations Act  (Pretoria: Department of Labour).  
Dreyer, B., F. Lüdeke -Freund, R. Hamann and K. Faccer (2017), ‘Upsides and Downsides of 
the Sharing Economy’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change  125, 87 -104.  
Drouillard, M. (2017), ‘Addressi ng Voids: How Digital Start -Ups in Kenya Create Market 
Infrastructure, in B. Ndemo and T. Weiss (eds), Digital Kenya  (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan), pp.97 -131.  
ETI (2014), The ETI Base Code  (London: Ethical Trading Initiative). 
http://www.ethicaltrade.org/eti -base -code  
FairCrowdWork (2016), Frankfurt Paper on Platform -Based Work  (Frankfurt: 
FairCrowdWork). http://fairc rowd.work/unions -for-crowdworkers/frankfurt -
declaration/  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
18 
 FairCrowdWork (2017), Platform Reviews  (Frankfurt: FairCrowdWork). 
http://faircrowd.work/platform -reviews/   
Fairwork (2019), The Five Pillars of Fairwork: Labour Standards in the Platform Economy  
(Oxford, UK: Fairwork Foundation).  http://fair.work/wp -
content/uploads/sites/97/2019/10/Fairwork -Y1-Report.pdf   
Ford, M. and V. Honan (2017), ‘The Go -Jek Effect’, in E. Jurriens and R. Tapsell (eds), Digital 
Indonesia: Connectivity and Divergence  (Singapore: ISEAS Publishing), pp. 275 -288.  
Ghai, D. (2003), ‘Decent Work: Concept and Indicators’, International Labou r Review  142, 2, 
113-145.  
Graham, M., I. Hjorth and V. Lehdonvirta (2017a), ‘Digital Labour and Development: Impacts 
of Global Digital Labour Platforms and the Gig Economy on Worker Livelihoods’, 
Transfer: European Review of Labour and Research  23, 2, 135 -162.  
Graham, M., V. Lehdonvirta, A. Wood, H. Barnard, I. Hjorth and D.P. Simon (2017b), The 
Risks and Rewards of Online Gig Work at the Global Margins  (Oxford, UK: Oxford 
Internet Institute).  
Heeks, R. (2017), Decent Work and the Digital Gig Economy , GDI D evelopment Informatics 
Working Paper no.71 (Manchester, UK: University of Manchester).  
Heeks, R. (2019), ‘How Many Platform Workers are There in the Global South?’, ICT4DBlog  
29 Jan. https://ict4dblog.wordpress.com/2019/01/29/how -many -platform -workers -are-
there -in-the-global -south/  
Hunt, A. and F. Machingura (2016) A Good Gig? The Rise of On -Demand Domestic Work , 
Working Paper 7 (London: Overs eas Development Institute).  
Huws, U. (2017), ‘Where did Online Platforms come from? The Virtualization of Work 
Organization and the New Policy Challenges it Raises’, in P. Meil and V. Kirov (eds), Policy 
Implications of Virtual Work  (Basingstoke, UK: Palgr ave Macmillan), pp. 29 -48. 
Ilavarasan, P.V., R.K. Verma and A.K. Kar (2018), ‘Sharing Economy Platforms as Enablers of 
Urban Transport in the Global South’ in Urban Transport in the  
Sharing Economy Era  (Buenos Aires: CIPPEC), pp. 128 -158.  
ILO (1999), Decen t Work  (Geneva: International Labour Organization).  
ILO (2013), Decent Work Indicators: Guidelines for Producers and Users of Statistical and 
Legal Framework Indicators , second version (Geneva: International Labour 
Organization).  
ILO (2019a), Work for a Br ighter Future  (Geneva: Global Commission on the Future of Work, 
International Labour Organization).  
ILO (2019b), Decent Work  (Geneva: International Labour Organization). 
https ://www.ilo.org/global/topics/decent -work/lang --en/index.htm  
Kaganer, E., E. Carmel, R. Hirschheim and T. Olsen (2013), ‘Managing the Human Cloud’, MIT 
Sloan Management Review  54, 2, 23 -32. 
Kashyap, R. and A. Bhatia (2018), ‘Taxi Drivers and Taxidars: A Case Study of Uber and Ola in 
Delhi’, Journal of Developing Societies  34, 2, 169 -194.  
Korner, T., K. Puch and C. Wingerter (2009), Quality of Employment  (Wiesbaden: Federal 
Statistical Office of Germany).  
Lehdonvirta, V. (2016), ‘Algorithms that Divide and Unite: Delocalization, Identity, and 
Collective Action in “Microwork”’, in J. Flecker (ed), Space, Place and Global Digital Work  
(Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave -Macmillan), pp. 53 -80. 
Mill, R. (20 11), Hiring and Learning in Online Global Labor Markets , Working Paper No. 11 -
17 (NET Institute). https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1957962  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
19 
 Noronha, E. and P. D’C ruz (2017), ‘Decent Work Deficits in Online Labour Markets: Negating 
Freelancers’ Perceived Empowerment’, paper presented  at 5th Conference of the 
Regulating for Decent Work Network , Geneva, 3 -5 Jul.  
Norton, A. (2017), Automation and Inequality: The Changing World of Work in the Global 
South  (London: International Institute for Environment and Development).  
O'Farrell, R. and P. Montagnier (2019), ‘Measuring Digital Platform‐Mediated Workers’, New 
Technology, Work and Employment , advance online publica tion.  
Olbert, M. and C. Spengel (2017), ‘International Taxation in the Digital Economy: Challenge 
Accepted’, World Tax Journal  9, 1, 3 -46. 
Pongratz, H.J. (2018), ‘Of Crowds and Talents: Discursive Constructions of Global Online 
Labour’, New Technology, Wor k and Employment  33, 1, 58 -73. 
RSA (1997), Basic Conditions of Employment Act 1997  (Cape Town: Republic of South Africa).  
SAI (2014), Social Accountability 8000  (New York, NY: Social Accountability International).  
Schmidt, F.A. (2017), Digital Labour Marke ts in the Platform Economy  (Bonn: Friedrich -
Ebert -Stiftung). http://library.fes.de/pdf -files/wiso/13164.pdf  
Silberman, M.S. (2017), ‘Fifteen Criteria for a Fairer Gig Economy’, in M. Graham and  J. Shaw 
(eds), Towards a Fairer Gig Economy  (Meatspace Press), pp. 16 -19. 
SSA (2019), Statistics by Place  (Pretoria: Statistics South Africa). 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/?page_id=964  
Spencer, D.A. (201 8), ‘Fear and Hope in an Age of Mass Automation: Debating the Future of 
Work’, New Technology, Work and Employment  33, 1, 1 -12. 
Surie, A. and J. Koduganti (2016), ‘The Emerging Nature of Work in Platform Economy 
Companies in Bengaluru, India: The Case of U ber and Ola Cab Drivers’, E-Journal of 
International and Comparative Labour Studies  5, 3. 
Testbirds (2017), Ground Rules for Paid Crowdsourcing / Crowdworking  (Munich: Testbirds). 
http://crowdsourcing -code.com / 
Wasserman, H. (2019), ‘This is the Average Monthly Salary Paid in South Africa’, Business 
Insider  27 May. https://www.businessinsider.co.za/average -salary-paid -at-south -african -
companies -2019 -3 
Wood, A.J., V. Lehdonvirta and M. Graham (2018), ‘Workers of the Internet Unite? Online 
Freelancer Organisation among Remote Gig Economy Workers in Six Asian and African 
Countries’, New Technology, Work and Emplo yment  33, 2, 95 -112.  
World Bank (2019), South Africa , World Bank Data (Washington, DC: World Bank). 
https://data.worldbank.org/country/south -africa  
WP (2020) Coloureds , Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coloureds  
 
Acknowledgements  
The fieldwork reported here was funded by the UK’s Economic and Social Research Council.  
 
 
1 Acknowledging that all gig work involves some physical activity and also the creation of digital data with a 
potential value.  
2 So-called because the workshops and development of the framework were undertaken as part of th e 
Fairwork programme ( http://fair.work ), which seeks to improve working conditions for digital platform 
workers.                                                        Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 85  
 
20 
                                                                                                                                                                      
3 As noted in the Conclusions, both worker and platform evidence -gathering was undertaken as part of a 
longer -term action research project that rates gig work platforms against decent work standards.  For further 
details, see Fairwork (2019).  
4 Within South  Africa, this term does not have the negative connotations found in some other parts of the 
world.  “Coloured” was a self -identification of the interviewees, referring to “a multiracial ethnic group native 
to Southern Africa who have ancestry from more tha n one of the various populations inhabiting the region” 
(WP 2020).  
5 For ride -hailing, delivery and domestic work platforms, this reflects the racial make -up of the workforce, with 
a significant racial skew against white workers (white people make up aroun d 15% of the combined 
populations of Cape Town and Johannesburg) and coloured workers (coloured people make up around 6% of 
Johannesburg’s population and 42% of Cape Town’s population) (SSA, 2019).  For digital work platforms, we 
deliberately sought non -white interviewees in order to provide a racial consistency of responses, focusing on 
those who are the majority of job seekers in South Africa.  A review of worker profiles suggested digital work 
to be dominated by white workers: for example, representing t wo-thirds of a sample of Upwork profiles.  
6 We did not systematically gather “before -and-after” data on pay but, for those that brought it up, it 
appeared that delivery riders were earning more than previously, even taking costs into account.  For domestic  
workers and taxi drivers this was less clear: we only had six responses but four of these were earning less than 
they had previously done.  
7 Excluding part -time workers, defined as those working less than 18 hours per week on a platform.  
8 R15 per hour fo r domestic workers.  
9 While there are likely to be platform -specific features – e.g. poor marketing or poor customer offer – at play, 
these findings will also reflect sectoral features such as excess of labour supply over demand.  As noted above, 
deliverer s often made up for low demand on one platform by simultaneously working for a second platform.  
10 As an example of the value split, for a driver driving a taxi owned by someone else, the fare paid by the 
passenger ended up: 20% to the platform; 27% to the owner (including costs for car insurance and 
maintenance); 18% paid for fuel and data; and 35% was the driver’s net income.  
11 Though drivers noted this might be of limited value since the first thing stolen in a robbery was their phone.  
12 Substituting the word ‘other person’ in the Act for ‘platform’ – except in criterion (c), where the substitution 
is for the original word ‘organisation’ – in order to assess whether the worker was an employee of the 
platform.  
13 The workers themselves were more equivocal.  Some saw themselves as working for their platform, others 
as working via their platform, others still that the platform worked for them: “I employ Uber, Uber don’t 
employ me”.  They had certainly imbibed the rhetoric of the platform economy: of the 47 who responded, 42 
(89%) preferred to be seen as independent contractors rather than employees.  
14 There was some differentiation by platform: deliverers were most concerned about pay; taxi drivers more 
about safety.  
15 Fieldwork also asked open questions of workers and they did not identify work -related issues that lay 
outside the five principles.  