 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 73  
 
Understanding the 
Development Implications of 
Online Outsourcing : A Study 
of Digital Labour Platforms in 
Pakistan  
 
FAREESA MALIK , BRIAN NICHOLSON & 
RICHARD HEEKS  
 
 
2018  
 
 
 
ISBN:  978-1-905469 -74-1 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
 
Educators ’ Guide from : 
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/educators -guide/   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264 
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A.  Introduction  ................................ ................................ ............................  2 
B.  Literature Review  ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
C.  Conceptual Framework  ................................ ................................ ............  5 
D.  Methodology  ................................ ................................ ...........................  6 
E.  Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
E1.  CONTEXTUAL DRIVERS TO ONLINE OUTSOURCING  ................................ ...........................  8 
E2.  ENABLERS AND BARRIERS : THE ONLINE OUTSOURCING ECOSYSTEM  ................................ ... 9 
E3.  DE-INSTITUTIONALISATION  AND RE-INSTITUTIONALISATION  ................................ .............  11 
E4.  THE IMPACT OF ONLINE OUTSOURCING  ................................ ................................ ...... 12 
F.  Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ............................  14 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
1 
 Understanding the Development 
Implications of Online Outsourcing : 
A Study of Digital Labour Platforms in 
Pakistan  
 
 
Fareesa Malik  
NUST Business School, 
National University of 
Science and Technology, 
Pakistan  
 Brian Nicholson  
Alliance Manchester 
Business School, University 
of Manchester, UK  Richard Heeks  
Centre for Development 
Informatics, University of 
Manchester, UK  
2018  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Online outsourcing involves outsourcing of tasks from clients to workers all over the world 
via digital  platforms like Upwork, Freelancer and Fiverr.  Millions  of workers in developing 
countries are already involved, and governments and donor agencies are starting online 
outsourcing initiatives that try to offer access to these digital livelihoods to margin alised 
groups such as unemployed youth and women.  However, little is yet known about these 
initiatives and, to address that gap, the research reported here undertook  case study 
analysis of online outsourcing projects in Pakistan.  
 
Supported by the sustain able livelihoods framework, the analysis showed a context of 
politico -economic vulnerability to push unemployed individuals into this field.  Those 
involved then divided into four groups: sinkers, strugglers, survivors and swimmers.  Many 
do not succeed bu t some – more entrepreneurial individuals pulled by the motivation of 
earnings potential – do, and are able to generate reasonable earnings; for example, enough 
to fund educational studies.  Contrary to an image of de -institutionalised work, this form of 
digital labour involves a substantial institutional ecosystem.  This means not just the online 
platforms but formal interventions from NGOs and other development agencies, and the 
creation of less formal social relations of support.   These are needed in ord er to overcome 
barriers including technical infrastructure, knowledge and skills, and financial systems.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
2 
 A.  Introduction  
 
Online outsourcing involves outsourcing of tasks from clients to workers all over the world 
via digital  platforms such as Upwork , Freelancer and Fiverr .  In total, more than 60 million 
workers in low - and middle -income countries are registered on these platforms, with 
estimates that around 10% - more than six million – are active (Heeks, 2017) .  It is predicted 
that, by 2020, the online outsourcing  sector overall will be worth US$15 -25bn (Kuek et al., 
2015).  
 
The scale of employment in  developing countries  is clearly significant , with up to a million  
active workers in  each of  India and the Philippines and tens of thousands in other countries 
such as South Africa and Kenya ( ibid. ; Wood et al., 2016 ; Heeks, 2017 ).  As a result, donor 
agencies such as the World Bank and national policy makers in developing countries, for 
instance, the Philippines, Malaysia and Pakista n have all seen potential for online 
outsourcing  to create livelihoods for marginalised groups: women, youth and those on 
lowest incomes .  online outsourcing  initiatives involving government - and donor agency -
funded training programmes for economic empower ment of these groups are therefore 
already underway.  
 
However, the novelty of this model for economic growth has created significant knowledge 
gaps which mean online outsourcing is likely to underperform in terms of its development 
potential .  Knowledge ga ps include issues of incentives and motivations, infrastructural 
requirements, financial and non -financial impacts, and impact on  longer -term career 
trajectories ( Kuek et al., 2015 ).  This paper provides an initial attempt – based on fieldwork 
undertaken i n 2016 in Pakistan – to address these gaps .  Specifically, using the sustainable 
livelihoods framework  (DFID, 1999)  as a sensitising lens, it addresses three questions:  
 What drives those in marginalised groups to engage in online outsourcing?  
 What is the infrastructural and institutional ecosystem required, particularly to address  
barriers to online outsourcing for marginalised groups?  
 What are the short - and longer -term impacts of online outsourcing for those involved?  
 
Our aim is to provide a three -fold c ontribution: reducing the knowledge gap through our 
findings; demonstrating one approach to the conceptualisation of online outsourcing to 
marginalised groups; and offering some nascent guidance to practitioners and policy -makers 
in developing countries wh o wish to make more effective use of online outsourcing as a 
development tool.  
 
Following a review of literature on online outsourcing, the paper outlines the conceptual 
framework that was used to shape fieldwork, details of which are discussed in the 
meth odology section .  Following presentation of the findings, some conclusions are drawn.  
 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
3 
 B.  Literature Review  
 
At the time of writing there are hundreds of examples of online outsourcing  platforms (see 
Table 1 for examples of major platforms) that incorporate a wide range of tasks including 
data entry and transcription; data analytics; web, mobile apps, and software development; 
legal and accounting services; engineering and architecture services; translation; 
administrative support; customer service; and sales and marketing.  
 
 
Table 1 .  Major online outsourcing platforms ( source: Wood et al., 2016)  
 
The information systems and business literature on online outsourcing  has – necessarily 
because of the global nature of the platforms – encompassed work undertaken in 
developing countries .  However, it has not taken a development orientation .  Instead, one 
set has tended to focus on organisational - or sectoral -level issues .  These may be overv iews: 
for example, understanding online outsourcing as a new “human cloud” type of business 
model (Kaganer et al., 2013) .  Or they may look specifically at the client -end of the value 
chain: for example, identifying online outsourcing as reducing the barri ers to offshoring and 
thus enabling a wider range of client organisations (e.g . smaller enterprises) to become 
involved (Hanley & Ott, 2012) .  Another set has focused more on the “mechanics” of online 
outsourcing platforms looking, for example, at the IT -enabled work monitoring systems 
(Liang et al., 2016) or use of feedback and profile information (Assemi & Schlagwein, 2016) 
that underpin the functions of the platforms.  
 
There is also literature looking at the worker -end of the value chain .  Some of this h as been 
quite negative in its view of online outsourcing, seeing it as a “digital sweatshop” (Zittrain, 
2009) .  Bergvall -Kåreborn & Howcroft (2014) and Ettlinger (2016) note the lack of typical 
employment benefits from this new form of employment with an a bsence of holiday pay, 
sick leave , health insurance, minimum wage, retirement benefits and compensation in the 
event of injury .  Workers are driven to accept these terms because of a background of 
economic austerity and uncertainty .  But such outcomes are enabled by the institutional 
context .  This can be explained in terms of a de -institutionalisation of work: an absence of 
legislative oversight for a work process that is invisible, mobile and transcends national 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
4 
 borders; and an absence of collective barga ining, collective wage agreements and 
unionisation in relation to labour (Bergvall -Kåreborn & Howcroft 2014) .  Or it can be 
explained in terms of the particular institutional rationalities imposed by digital platforms: 
decentralisation, precarisation, info rmalisation (Ettlinger 2016) .  In either case, there has 
been a concern to re -institutionalise; particularly helping to develop labour -oriented 
institutions .  Actions include:  
 creation of platforms that seek to mitigate information asymmetries between clients 
and workers; providing reputational information on clients to match the reputational 
information on workers that main platforms provide (Irani & Silberman, 2014), and  
 creation of labour unions for online outsourcing workers (Zuckerman et al., 2015) . 
 
Because of the novelty of online outsourcing, critical research is often based on secondary 
sources, and primary research has given a somewhat more nuanced view with a picture 
emerging of differentiation .  Study of skill and employment impacts of online  outsourcing  
working found, for example, that this work enables workers “to renew existing skills through 
practice, to discover and utilise latent skills and to develop specialist skills” and to improve 
their employability (Barnes et al., 2015:28) .  Howeve r, this only happened for those workers 
who could overcome skill and other barriers to entry, and who could employ “continuous 
marketing, good client management skills and self -promotion” and who operationalised 
“characteristics of self -efficacy, motivatio n, self -reliance and adaptability” ( ibid. : 28).  
 
Research on financial impact of online outsourcing shows that most workers use this to 
supplement other sources of income .  However, there are significant numbers who use it as 
a main source of income (Berg,  2016) .  Here also there is a differentiation, but geographic .  
First, those in developing countries are more likely to use online outsourcing as a main 
source of income: half of Indian workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk stated this ( ibid. ).  
Second, paymen ts differ .  Online outsourcing  workers in the global North tend to earn more 
in absolute terms but workers in the global South earn more in relative terms, i.e . relative to 
average wages in their country (Barnes et al., 2015; Beerepoot & Lambregts, 2015).  
 
This promise of relatively -good wages and livelihoods has propelled significant interest in 
online outsourcing in developing countries, with particular aspirations that it could provide 
livelihoods to groups often excluded from the economic mainstream suc h as women and 
young people (it is estimated that two -thirds of young people in developing countries are 
either unemployed or trapped in low -quality, low -skill jobs  (Kuek et al., 2015)) .  As a result, a 
number of online outsourcing initiatives have been im plemented .  Examples include:  
 The NaijaCloud initiative in Nigeria, sponsored by the World Bank and supported by the 
national government, which provided  awareness workshops on online outsourcing.  
 The Youth Employment Programme ( https://www.kpyep.com/ ) of Pakistan’s Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) provincial government which has aimed  to train 40,000 young 
people to use Upwork and similar platforms.  
 Malaysia’s eRezeki initiative ( https://ere zeki.my/ ) which has trained hundreds of 
freelancers and uses a “walled garden” approach with US crowdsourcing platform 
Massolutions: a managed portal for online outsourcing  work such that the work process 
is controlled by government.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
5 
 Yet, as noted in the Introduction, this increase in activity has not yet been matched by 
growth in research .  There is some work (e.g . Beerepoot & Lambregts, 2015; Berg, 2016) 
that takes  a global perspective including workers in developing countries ; and a little looking 
speci fically at developing countries (e.g . Heeks, 2017; Wood et al., 2018) .  However, we are 
not aware of research looking specifically at online outsourcing  in developing countries  that 
aims directly to assist those in marginalised groups .  It is this which mo tivates the current 
study.  
 
 
C.  Conceptual Framework  
 
Work in online outsourcing represents a livelihood .  Reflecting earlier work analysing 
outsourcing of IT -based work to marginalised groups (Heeks & Arun, 2010), we therefore 
decided that our conceptualisation of this activity would be shaped by the sustainable 
livelihood framework (DFID, 1999) .  The SLF (see summary overview in Figure 1) sees 
livelihoods as existing within a context of vulnerabilities which can drive or undermine 
livelihood st rategies .  It is therefore particularly to this context that we will look in order to 
answer our first question about drivers to online outsourcing . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1.  Livelihoods frame of analysis ( source: Duncombe , 2006)  
 
To create a strategy, individuals draw on a set of capital assets .  Here, and following the 
earlier Heeks and Arun (2010) study, we considered the four that were particularly relevant:  
 Human capital: “the skills, knowledge, ability to labour and good health that together 
enable people to pursue different livelihood strategies and achieve their livelihood 
objectives” (DFID, 1999:7).  
 
Capital Assets  
 
Human  
Financial  
Socio -cultural  
Socio -political  
Physical  
Natural  
Social R elations  
Gender  
Culture  
Ethnicity  
 
Institutions  
Governing  
Market  
Regulatory  
 
Organisations  
International  
Government  
NGOs  
Private  
 
Vulnerability  
 
Contextual  
Analysis  
Livelihood  
Strengths  
Mediated  
Through  
 
Livelihood  
Strategies  
 
Livelihood 
Outcomes  
Resulting  
In 
Impacting  
Upon  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
6 
  Social capital: “the social resources upon which people draw in pursuit of their livelihood 
objectives” ( ibid. :9). 
 Physical capital: “the basic infrastructure and producer goods needed to support 
livelihoods” ( ibid. :13).  
 Financial capital: “the financial reso urces that people use to achieve their livelihood 
objectives” ( ibid. :15).  
These assets are deployed within a broader environment of relations, institutions and 
organisations – both formal and informal – which, for example, shape access to those assets 
and also the options for their integration which form different livelihood strategies .  In 
answering our second question, we will therefore understand barriers and ecosystem in 
terms of the capital assets and the access to livelihood assets that the institutio nal and 
organisational environment provides.  
 
Finally, we can understand the impact of a livelihood in terms of the lower reverse arrow in 
the diagram, measuring that impact in terms of improvements – or otherwise – to the stock 
of assets that individuals can call upon (see Heeks & Arun, 2010) .  We will use this approach 
to answer our third question.  
 
 
D.  Methodology  
 
We report on a field study undertaken in 2016 involving interviews with stakeholders at two 
World Bank -funded online outsourcing training organisations in Pakistan:  the Karakoram 
Area Development Organization (KADO) and Empower Pakistan (EP) .  These organi sations 
have designed and implemented training and support schemes aiming to enable women 
and unemployed youth in Pakistan to engage in online outsourcing.  
 
We followed a qualitative exploratory field study method (Palvia et al., 2007) to investigate 
the c ontext and impact of online outsourcing  livelihoods, with fieldwork based particularly  
in the Northern Pakistan region of Gilgit -Baltistan .  A semi -structured interview format 
based on sustainable livelihoods categories and concepts provided the structure to guide 
the interviews .  The questions acted as an interview guide and allowed the interviewer 
flexibility to probe into unanticipated areas of interest to the interviewees based on the 
conversation .  Interviews were recorded, translated, transcribed, and  coded in 
computerised qualitative data management software (NVivo 10) using a template analysis 
approach (King, 2012).  
 
The sample was derived from online outsourcing  freelancers who had received training from 
KADO - and EP -implemented  online outsourcing  schemes in Pakistan .  Table 2 below includes 
details of the sample data from the two training organisations .  Altogether 29 interviews 
were undertaken of 30 -60 minutes duration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
7 
  
Organisation  Respondent 
Designation  Location of 
Interviewees  Interview 
mode  
 No of 
Respondents  
World Bank  Project Lead  Washington – 
USA   Skype  1 
EP  CEO Islamabad – 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  1 
Project 
Manager  Islamabad – 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  1 
Ex-Trainees 
and 
Freelancers  Lahore – 
Pakistan  Skype  3 
KADO  Project 
Manager  Hunza – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  1 
Trainer and 
Freelancer  Hunza – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  3 
Project 
Coordinator  Gilgit – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  1 
Ex-Trainees  Hunza – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  5 
Ex-Trainee 
and Medical 
Transcribers  Karachi – 
Pakistan  Skype  1 
Trainees and 
Bloggers  Ghizer – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  9 
Ex-Trainees 
and 
Freelancers  Gilgit – Gilgit 
Baltistan 
Pakistan  Face -to-
face  3 
 
Total Number of Respondents   
29 
Table 2 .  Field study sample  
 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
8 
 E.  Findings  
 
In the sections to follow we present the results and analysis of our field data grouped in 
relation to our initial questions.  
 
E1.  Contextual Drivers to Online Outsourcing  
 
The starting point for any livelihood analysis is an understanding of the vulnerability context .  
As indicated, the KADO element of the field study was undertaken in Gilgit -Baltistan (GB; 
see Figure 2 below) , the northernmost administrative territory of Pakistan .  Geographically, 
the region is a home of world highest mountain ra nges including Karakoram, Himala yas and 
Hindu Kush .  The project coordinator related the geographic condition to lack of industries 
and commented:  
“…..the problem here is that our job market is very poor .  We do not have industries 
here”  (Project Coordinator, KADO)  
 
Alongside physical vulnerabilities to climate -related disas ters, the area  has been subject to a 
negatively -reinforcing politico -economic vulnerability context that limits conventional 
employment rou tes.  One foundation is that GB is kind of a disputed region .  It is a part of 
Pakistan  that has  neither received the status of a province to be eligible for an independent 
provincial government, legislation  and budget; nor has it been integrated with any of the 
existing provinces of Pakistan because of the possib le effect on resolving the Kash mir 
dispute .  The result is a “no man’s land” position that severely restricts both private and 
public sector investment and thus restricts infrastructural developmen t and employment 
opportunities:  
“The problem is that we live in Gilgit -Baltistan; which is itself a conflicted area .  ...  
That is why the government is not doing much investment for prosperity here”   
Project Manager  KADO)  
 
 
Figure  2.  Gilgit -Baltistan ge ographical location  
 
The EP initiative, meanwhile, targeted educated youth of middle and lower socio -economic 
status in Punjab province, which is a highly populated province of Pakistan; but also 
provided online outsourcing  training to educated youth of  Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) 
province, which is the most terrorism -effected province of Pakistan  and lies next to Gilgit -
Baltistan .  Lack of investment, lack of opportunities and high unemployment create a fertile 
environment for growth of radical Islamic extr emism which, in turn, serves to further 
discourage investment and employment.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
9 
 “The reason is it’s the front line of extremism .. .  The next biggest issue is 
unemployment .  Both of these issues are interrelated because when there is 
unemployment, the chance s of frustrated youth to be involved in terrorist activities 
would be higher.”  (Project Manager, EP)  
 
The absence of alternative livelihoods is a core driver to involvement in online outsourcing.  
“Everyone wants to get the government job but it is not avai lable… Maybe the 
condition gets better in the future but currently, there is nothing better here than 
freelancing and working and earning at home.”  (Ex-trainee, KADO)  
The ability to work at home is an especial driver for women, “who have to stay at home.. .  
who can’t work in offices for various cultural and other reasons.”  (Project Lead,  World Bank) . 
 
But alongside this generic socio -economic push are specific pulls into online outsourcing .  
For some of those involved, there is the attraction of a livelihoo d that offers more freedom 
than traditional jobs:  
“You are your own boss .  You don’t have any boss .  You can work of your choice at 
any time you like.”  (Trainer and Freelancer, KADO)  
 
Another important pull has been the presence of attractive role models who demonstrate 
not just the viability but the significant benefits of an online outsourcing  livelihood .  
Sometimes these role models are friends, but they can also be presented at form al events .  
One trainee shared his inspiration:  
“..RA (a famous blogger in the region) tells once about his freelancing experience in a 
presentation .  He opened his account and showed it to us .  At that time, his earning 
was twelve to fifteen lakh Pakistan i rupees per month (c.US$12,000 -15,000).”  
(Trainee,  KADO)  
 
 
E2.  Enablers and Barriers: The Online Outsourcing Ecosystem  
 
Related to its relatively remote, troubled and under -invested context – and notwithstanding 
a strong emphasis on education in the regi on – Gilgit -Baltistan has important resource 
constraints that are barriers to engagement of marginalised groups with online outsourcing.  
 
There are three recurring barriers that respondents mentioned .  First, the state of 
technological infrastructure:  
“We don’t have high speed Internet and full time electricity in this area .  So we don’t 
have basic things for freelancing.”  (Trainer,  KADO)  
 “Sometimes  it happens that there is some I nternet work of web research for which 
client demands to check y our I nternet speed and asked to send its screenshot .  So, it 
happened that when I sent them the screenshot of the low I nternet speed; they did 
not give work.”  (Project Coordinator, KADO)  
 
Second, a lack of knowledge and skills; members of marginalised groups lacked an 
understanding of what online outsourcing was and how to link it in to online outsourcing  
jobs.  And they lacked relevant skills: not just technical skills but broader interper sonal and 
business skills:  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
10 
 “The one -week freelancing training is sufficient for the people in cities who are 
experts and highly qualified with MCS, MBA, MBBS Degrees .  ….  However here, we 
have to engage the trainees with us for six months so that they can  learn how to 
communicate with the clients.”  (Project Manager, KADO)  
 
Third, problems with finance and getting payments from overseas, though that has recently 
improved for some:  
 ”…when you transfer the money locally, so there are no deductions .  I have a  Soneri 
Bank account, so when I received my freelancing payments recently, there was no 
charges that deducted.”  (Trainer, KADO)  
 
As noted in these quotes, external interventions and innovations – by government agencies, 
by NGOs, by private providers – are seen as vital to address these barriers .  Therefore, 
sufficient technological, human and financial infrastructure – and the institutions to deliver 
that infrastructure – are an essential part of the online outsourcing  ecosystem.  
 
More challenging to addres s are cultural barriers .  Gender barriers were one: the project 
managers who said male freelancers were “more serious” further explained the additional 
workload or domestic house chore expectations on women:  
“…when the guests come, so being a girl, I have to serve, of course .  Boys do not need 
to do this .  They just sit on one side and work.”  (Trainer, KADO)  
 “They have the responsibilities of many domestic chores .  They have to cook after 
attending a freelancing class and also look after the family  as it i s in our culture.”  
(Trainer, KADO)  
 
Another was the cultural expectations of what constitutes a livelihood, which reflected 
negatively on freelancing .  Many trainees and freelancing shared their personal experiences:  
“They say that this person is not doing  a job but staying at home.”  (Trainee,  KADO)  
 “My parents are uneducated .  So, they won’t understand freelancing .  They just want 
that their son to go to the office, use a big car and work on some important 
government position, and people can praise them how successful is their son.”  
(Trainee, KADO)  
“My younger brother is a translator of Chinese language .  So he has been doing a 
proper job for the last seven years .  The parents are very happy with him .  He is three 
years younger to me but they have got him  married first and in that way, they have 
given him the family responsibility .  I am single right now…People around me don’t 
think me right .  They say that this person wakes up at 10 o’clock in the morning …. .  
He keeps awake the whole night …Overall, in t he family, my image is so bad that I do 
not do a proper job.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
 
 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
11 
 E3.  De-institutionalisation and Re -institutionalisation  
 
The image – and criticism – of online outsourcing is that it represent hypercapitalism: a 
stripping away of the inst itutions that put a brake on the worst excesses of competition, 
leaving atomised, isolated workers in a race to the bottom in which clients have all the 
power .  The reality, though, is rather different with at least three institutional forces 
impinging on online outsourcing to marginalised groups in Pakistan.  
 
First, there are the digital platforms themselves .  It is of course they, more than clients, that 
hold the power in this marketplace but the constrained institutionalised relation between 
clients and freelancers – particularly the lack of human connection and trust – sometimes 
led to problems  
“I think the system of Freelancer and Upwork is very tough .  ...  I cannot work on that 
level .  We can work over there, but we don’t get the work there .  ...  I made an 
account on Upwork but we have some difficulties there .  We had some problem in 
creating a profile there .  I cannot do work in English correctly .  Sometimes, they 
cancel the jobs .  We do not understand what they are talking about .  Sometimes, 
they g ive us poor rating .  That is also a dead block.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
“It happened with me that I worked with some fake people .  I anyhow completed 
their work, and they got their work, but I did not get any payments”  (Trainer, KADO)  
 
However, in a number of way s the digital platforms are seen as recently improving the 
institutional context for online outsourcing  to the relative benefit of freelancers; particularly 
trying to reduce the moral hazard that arises due to the asymmetry of power and lack of 
trust betwe en clients and freelancers, and the lack of social costs for “bad behaviour” by 
clients:  
“The freelancing marketplaces are improving their processes .  They are blocking 
accounts for any violation of their terms and conditions .  They h ave introduced 
differe nt matrix -like job success rather than relying on customers’ reviews.”  (Project 
Manager, EP)  
“Now Upwork holds advanced payment from the clients and transfers it to the 
freelancer once the job has completed successfully , which has reduced the fraud and 
exploitation .  Upwork has also introduced easier payment methods.”  (Trainer, KADO)  
“Upwork has changed its policy of minimum work wage .  Previously, they had 
allowed working for US$1 per hour .  Later they fixed it to minimum US$3 per hour.”  
(Project Coordinator, KADO)  
 
Second, there has been the intervention of development agencies, government and NGOs .  
As described, local NGOs – supported and funded by the World Bank – have been providing 
training in a wide variety of skills, guidance, and  access to ICTs, etc .  Government bodies in 
Pakistan are also launching freelancing schemes .  At the least, this re-instit utionalisation of 
online outsourcing is helping to overcome asset deficits that would otherwise exclude 
marginalised workers from online outsourcing .  But in some cases, the re-instit utionalisation 
goes further: for example the neighbouring government of KPK province is planning to use a 
“walled garden” approach .  This creates a protected area of the online platform into which 
tasks spec ifically suitable for the Pakistan freelancers are channelled, sheltering them from 
the full force of competition.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
12 
  
Third, among the freelancers themselves, there are a range of institutions formed; again to 
address barriers to online outsourcing .  These m ay be individual and social to address 
knowledge deficits about online outsourcing : 
“I completed my first online outsourcing project with the help of one or two of my 
friends.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
“I have recently guided my cousin about freelancing.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
And they range up to more formal and economic formations used to help balance 
workloads, and also to assist more -junior freelancers.  
“People are working in groups here .  Some of the freelancers are getting local small 
projects and they are  working on it for $300 to $400 together.”  (Trainer, KADO)  
 
This does not mean that competition and asymmetries of power between clients and 
freelancers is not an issue, but these institutions do introduce some compensations and 
protections .  Without these  it is likely that few, if any, of the freelancers in this relatively 
remote and resource -constrained area of Pakistan would create successful online 
outsourcing  livelihoods.  
 
 
E4.  The Impact of Online Outsourcing  
 
All of those who go through the formal t raining programmes develop their human capital in 
various ways .  As noted above they develop ICT -related capabilities: “the technical skills for 
freelancing such as e -marketing,  blogging, search engine optimis ation, graphic and web -
designing”  (Project Manager, KADO) but also broader skills including communication in 
English and : 
 “They even teach us how to write cover letters .  Also, they taught about proposal 
writing, means they told us everything about how to deal with the clients .  I am 
getting a new skill, which I have not learnt before .  There is growth on personal level 
as well .  I won’t be able to talk to you had I not been doing a j ob.  I had very less 
confidence .” (Trainee, EP)  
 
However, in terms of the conversion of this human capital  into financial capital via a 
freelancing livelihood, the trainees appear to divide into four trajectories: sinking, 
struggling, surviving and swimming . 
 
Sinking : the majority fall into the first camp: the manager on one of the programmes 
estimated that ne arly 60% of trainees did not take up freelancing livelihoods . 
 
Struggling : of those that do, a number struggle to find work because of the highly 
competitive nature of the work, and the Catch -22 that it is hard to get work without a 
profile of work experie nce, and you canno t get such a profile unless you get work:  
“There is a friend of mine .. .  When he did not get any order for six months so his 
family members were also irritated .  They said to him to leave this freelancing and 
work in a factory .  He went to the factory as a data entry operator”  (Trainee, EP)  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
13 
 “I tried on freelancer.com but did not get a job .  Its reason was suppose I bid for a 
project, second bidder can see my bid, so he bids a little lower than my bid .  Then the 
third bidder can see both b ids of ours.”  (Trainer, KADO)  
 
A number of respondents also echoed concerns in the literature about the lack of wider 
employment benefits and protections that platform  employment would bring (noting that 
care must be taken in choice of comparison point: those employed in government jobs in 
Pakistan have a number of rights and privileges; those employed in informal sector jobs do 
not) .  This was mainly framed in terms of  illness:  
“When a person is healthy, he can do this work .  If he gets ill, so he will be unable to 
work and there would be no chances for any money.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
 
Surviving : of those that do find work, some are just subsisting at a low level of activit y; again 
largely due to the high level of competition:  
“The competition is so tough .  There are many freelancers from Pakistan, India and 
Philippines .  As the Philippines work on very low rates so you need to lower your rates 
because of them.”  (Yrainer, KADO)  
“I applied for around three to four hundred jobs, and then I got one job .  It is not an 
easy task .  On Upwork, there are millions of freelancers, and then all apply for a job .  
We have to compete with them.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
 
Swimming : others have been able to build up their experience, reputation and contacts to 
create – if not a full livelihood – then reasonable earnings, bearing in mind monthly per 
capita income in Pakistan in 2016 was US$125  (World Bank, 2017 ): 
“I am earning twenty five thousand to thirty thousand per month ($250 to $300) .  
From the next month, my earning would also be increased and when I will become 
here Level 2 seller and would get more orders in freelancing projects .  The one which I 
did in the morning, it was of $30 and I did it in three hours .  The next one was of $10 
and I did it in an hour .  Now, one of $60 and two of $90 are left to deliver.”  (Trainee, 
EP) 
“If you can check online, please see the profile of our graphics and web trainer, 
Aslam .  He started from $1 per hour .  Now, he is working on $27 per hour.”  (Trainer, 
KADO)  
 
These amounts are sufficient for reinvestment in other forms of capital .  Some are seeking 
to invest in physical capital, for example, saving to buy a home .  Others are studying and 
invest th eir earnings in development of their own human capital:  
 “My brother and two other cousins, who are studying Masters, meet their expenses 
through earning online by designing logos and websites .  They also send money to 
their homes and are supporting their families.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
“My one semester fee is twenty thousand PKR (US$200) that I earn through 
freelancing in 15 to 20 days.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
 
There is a chronology here .  Those struggling and surviving are typically in the early days of 
freelancing, and they either give up or work their way up to better work and better rates of 
pay.  There seemed to be some differentiation that was interpreted in terms of personality 
type or characteristics, echoing the findings of Barnes et al . (2015) reported earlie r: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
14 
  “Not everybody can be a freelancer and it takes some characteristics and some 
drives to do the kinds of jobs there would be through technology or leveraging the 
tech sector for people who are entrepreneurially freelancing.”  (Project Lead, World 
Bank)  
 
For those that do persevere, progression often relates to the changing profile of work they 
undertake: where data entry jobs pay at most US$4 per hour, web / graphics / programming 
work can attract rates of US$30 per hour .  Of course in some respects it is  early days for all 
freelancers – few of them have been working for more than a year or so .  A number see it as 
a short -term livelihood e.g . to pay college fees:  
 “People do not make this as a career .  You cannot go with this for the long term.”  
(Trainee, KADO)  
 
But at least one or two were recognising the longer -term potential:  
“I have left everything else and choose to do this only because I know that its future is 
expanding further, in software development, designing .  Even I think that I bring 
people fr om my family, friends, relatives, siblings in this and convince them to work in 
this very field.”  (Trainee, KADO)  
 
However, whether that long -term potential means continuing with freelancing work is 
unclear .  Some were trying to trade the reputation and cl ient contacts they had made via 
the platforms into direct, off -platform working which would pay more and potentially be 
less volatile:  
“I have been working with different clients and we have communicated now and then 
so it happens that once your profile is  built on Upwork so you can work outside it as 
well as clients and companies know you now .  Even leaving from there, you can work 
directly with those companies or you can become their online employee.”  (Trainer, 
KADO)  
 
But it remains to be seen what the longer -term career trajectories will be in practice.  
 
 
F.  Conclusions  
 
The answer to the first question – “What drives those in marginalised groups to engage in 
online outsourcing?” – lies particularly in the context of significant vulnerability: physical , 
political, economic .  It means the main driving force is necessity of earning a living and 
absence of other livelihood strategies .  For a sub -set, this “push” driving force is set 
alongside a “pull” of opportunity: the perception that online outsourcing offers an 
entrepreneurial work - and life -style.  
 
In addressing the second question – “What is the  infrastructural and institutional ecosystem 
required, particularly to address barriers to online outsourcing for marginalised groups?” – 
we found there were a  number of important barriers relating to capital assets and 
institutions .  Physical and human capitals were especially lacking and there were also 
institutional barriers, for example around payment systems, gender roles, and cultural 
constructions of what  constituted meaningful work.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
15 
  
The cultural barriers are deep -rooted and addressing them lies beyond the scope of main 
online outsourcing stakeholders .  Overcoming asset -based barriers is more straightforward 
but still requires the creation of a broad -base d ecosystem: an infrastructure of electricity, 
telecommunications and ICT; and a whole set of institutions that help  to level the playing 
field – raising individuals and locations up from their asset -deficit sta tus to a situation where 
they a re able to par ticipate in online outsourcing .  The range of institutions involved was 
substantial and slightly confounds the negative portrayals of online outsourcing in one 
fraction of the literature .  We saw instances in which digital platforms were not just siding 
with clients and capital but made  concessions and improvements that benefited the 
workers (though of course done in order to maximise activity on the platform) .  And we saw 
examples of re -institutionalisation in this rather de -institutionalised form of work:  both 
formal interventions by donors, governments and NGOs that were mainly beneficial to the 
freelancers; and less -formal institution -formation by workers themselves, creating social 
networks of assistance.  
 
Finally, we saw in answering the third question  – “What are the short - and longer -term 
impacts of online outsourcing for those involved?” – that there were universal gains in 
human capital .  This was entirely expected given we focused on those who had been 
trained .  There was a differentiated financial  impact: many trainees “failed to launch” while 
others struggled to make anything much more than “pin money” .  But a significant number 
were able to generate earnings with some – perhaps those with particular characteristics of 
enterprise, self -efficacy, c ommunication – building themselves up to earn a reasonable 
living from online outsourcing enabling them, for example, to invest in their own education .  
We did not elicit much evidence around impacts on social and physical capital and, similarly, 
the relat ive novelty of online outsourcing makes it difficult to assess longer -term impacts 
such as those on career trajectories.  
 
In practical terms, our research shows online outsourcing interventions can be successful in 
assisting those from marginalised groups into forms of digital employment .  These 
interventions were also shown to be necessary: the barriers to entry into online outsourcing 
are too high for most individuals in resource -constrained environments .  Of course, we did 
not make a cost -benefit assessm ent, so cannot comment on whether these investments 
might have greater impact if used in other ways .  One concern could be the high drop -out 
rate though a glass half -full perspective would focus on the large numbers who do move 
into online outsourcing work .  It remains to be seen whether the psychological or other 
differences between those who succeed in online outsourcing and those who do not might 
have a practical importance . 
 
In conceptual terms, we have shown the sustainable livelihoods framework to be viable and 
useful in structuring evidence and ideas relating to online outsourcing  on digital platforms , 
and that it can be used  to shape further research on this topic.  
 
 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
16 
 References  
 
Assemi, B. &  Schlagwein, D. (2016) Provider feedback information and customer choice 
decisions on crowdsourcing marketplaces, Decision Support Systems , 82, 1 -11 
Barnes, S.A., Green, A. & Hoyos, M. (2015) Crowdsourcing and work: individual factors and 
circumstances inf luencing employability,  New Technology, Work and Employment , 30(1), 16 -
31 
Beerepoot, N. & Lambregts, B. (2015) Competition in online job marketplaces: towards a 
global labour market for outsourcing services?, Global Networks , 15(2), 236 -255 
Berg, J. (2016)  Income Security in the On -Demand Economy , ILO, Geneva  
Bergvall‐Kåreborn, B. & Howcroft, D. (2014) Amazon Mechanical Turk and the 
commodification of labour,  New Technology, Work and Employment , 29(3), 213 -223 
DFID (1999) Sustainable Livelihood Guidance Sheet Section 2 , DFID, London  
Duncombe, R. (2006) Using the livelihoods framework to analyze ICT applications for 
poverty reduction through microenterprise,  Information Technologies & International 
Development , 3(3), 81 -100 
Ettlinger, N. (2016) Th e governa nce of crowdsourcing: r ationalities of the new 
exploitation,  Environment and Planning A , 48(11), 2162 -2180  
Hanley, A. & Ott, I. (2012)  What Happened to Foreign Outsourcing when Firms went Online? , 
Working Paper 1774, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, K iel, Germany  
Heeks, R. (2017) Decent Work and the Digital Gig Economy: A Developing Country 
Perspective on Employment Impacts and Standards in Online Outsourcing, Crowdwork, etc , 
Development Informatics Working Paper no.71, Centre for Development Informati cs, 
University of Manchester, UK https://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/   
Heeks, R. & Arun, S. (2010) Social outsourcing as a development tool: the impact of 
outs ourcing IT services to women’s social enterprises in Kerala, Journal of International 
Development , 22(4), 441 -454 
Irani, L. & Silberman, M. (2014) From critical desi gn to critical infrastructure: l essons from 
Turkopticon,  interactions , 21(4), 32 -35 
Kaganer, E., Carmel, E., Hirschheim, R. & Olsen, T. (2013)  Managing the human cloud, MIT 
Sloan Management Review , 54(2), 23 -32 
King, N. (2012) Doing template analysis, in Qualitative Organizational Research: Core 
Methods and Current Challenges , G. Simon & C. Cassel (eds.), Sage, London, 426 -450 
Kuek, S.C., Paradi -Guilford, C., Fayomi, T, Imaizumi, S., Ipeirotis, P., Pina, P. & Singh, M. 
(2015) The Global Opportunity in Online Outsourcing , World Bank, Washington, DC  
Liang, C., Hong, Y. & Gu, B. (2016) Effect s of IT -enabled monitoring systems in online labor 
markets, paper presented at  International Conference on Information Systems , Dublin, 
Ireland, 11 -14 Dec  
Palvia, P.,  Pinjani, P.  & Sibley, E.H.  (2007) A profile of information systems research 
published in  Information & Management,  Information & Management , 44(1),  1‐11. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 73  
17 
 Wood, A., Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., Barnard, H. & Hjorth, I. (2016) Virtual production 
networks: fixing commodification and disembeddedness, paper presented at UK 
Development Studies Assoc iation Conference , Oxford, UK, 12 -14 Sep  
Wood, A., Lehdonvirta, B. & Graham, M. (2018) Workers of the Internet unite?, New 
Technology, Work and Employment , 33(2), 95 -112 
World Bank (2017 ) GDP per Capita , World Bank, Washington, DC 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD  
Zittrain, J. (2009) The internet creates a new kind of sweatshop, Newsweek , 8 Dec  
Zuckerman, M., Kahlenberg, R.D. & Marvit, M.Z. (2015) Virtual Labor Organizing , The 
Century Foundation, New York, NY  
 
Acknowledgements  
An earlier  version of this paper was presented at the IFIP WG9.4 14th international 
conference ICTs for Promoting Social Harmony , Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 22 -24 May 2017; and 
published as:  
 Malik, F., Nich olson, B. &  Heeks , R. (2017) Understanding th e development implications 
of online outsourci ng. In: Choudrie J., Islam M., Wahid F., Bass J., Priyatma J. (eds) 
Information and Communication Technologies for Development. ICT4D 2017 , IFIP 
Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol 504. Springer, Cham , 425-
436 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3427264