 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process  of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 77  
 
Urban Slums in a Datafying 
Milie u: Challenges for Data -
Driven Research Practic e 
 
BIJAL BRAHMBHATT, SIRAZ HIRANI,  
NEHA LAL &  BHUMIKA CHAUHAN  
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Developm ent Institute, SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ..............................  5 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 9 
D1. ‘FIXING THEM ON THE MA PS’ ................................ ................................ .......................  9 
D2.  DATA OWNERSHIP AND TR ANSLATING DATA /EVIDENCE INTO ACTION  ................................ . 12 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 16 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  18 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 18 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 19 
APPENDIX : SLUM MAPPING STEPS AND CHALLENGES  ................................ ...........................  20 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
1 
 Urban Slums in a Datafying Milieu: 
Challenges for Data -Driven Research Practice  
 
 
 
Bijal Brahmbhatt  
Mahila Housing Trust   Siraz Hirani   
Mahila Housing Trust  
 
Neha Lal  
Mahila Housing Trust  & Bhumika Chauhan  
Mahila Housing Trust  
 
2019  
 
 
Abstract  
 
With the ongoing trend of urban datafication and growing use of data/evidence  to shape 
developmental initiatives by state as well as non -state actors, this exploratory case study 
engages with the complex and often contested domains of data use. This study uses on-the-
ground experience of working with informal settlements in Indian cities to examine how 
information value chains work in practice and the contours of their power to intervene in 
building an agenda of social justice into governance regimes. Using  illustrative examples 
from ongoing action -oriented  projects  of Mahila Housing Trust in India  such as the Energy 
Audit Project , Slum Mapping Exercise and women -led climate resilience building under the 
Global Resilience Partnership , it raises questions abo ut challenges of making effective 
linkages between data, knowledge and action in and for slum communities in the global 
South by focussing on two issues.  
 
First, it reveals dilemmas of achieving data accuracy when working with slum communities 
in developing cities where populations are dynamically changing,  and where digit isation and 
use of ICT has limit ed operational currency. The second issue focuses on da ta ownership . It 
foregrounds  the need for  complementary inputs  and the heavy requirement for  support 
systems in  informal settlements in order to translate data -driven knowledge into actionable 
forms . Absence of these will blunt  the edge of data -driven comm unity participation in local 
politics. Through these intersecting streams, the study attempts to address how 
entanglements between southern urbanism, datafication, governance and social justice 
diversify the discourse on data justice. It highlights existin g hurdles and struc tural 
hierarchies within a data -heavy developmental register emergent across multiple cities in 
the global South where data -driven governmental regimes interact with convoluted urban 
forms and realities.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Of late , govern ance regimes in the global South have been increasingly enamoured by the 
reach of data, digit isation and documentation in order for the state to see, regulate and 
govern its citizens (Scott 1999). In Benign Dataveillance  - the New Kind of Democracy? , Payal  
Arora (2019) illustrates some of these rising impulses th rough the ongoing biometrically -
driven and database -led Unique Identification Number (UID) project in India for citizen 
documentation; and  the Social Credits system in China that crosslinks citizenr y’s online and 
offline activity to rewards or punitive action on the basis of their credit scores. While such 
reconfigurations within governance as a way of producing level playing fields and pushing 
the agenda of equity remain questionable, what continues  to intrigue is the way in which 
the process of datafication is being made an indispensable  precursor to the discourse on the 
future of governance.  
 
As one of the biggest digital projects in India  if not the world , UID, popularly called Aadhaar1 
is hailed as a technological overhaul of welfare scheme targeting and direct benefit 
transfers. Scholars argue that “Aadhaar may not only enable efficient design, delivery, 
monitoring and evaluation of services…[..]..but may also offer the possibility of using 
moder n data analytics and machine learning techniques for finding large -scale  correlations 
in user data. This, in turn, may facilitate an improved design of social policy strategies, 
including targeting, and early detection and warning systems for anomalies” (B anerjee 
2017).  Yet at the same time, the scheme has courted both debate and protests on issues of 
privacy, security and exclusionary biases.  
 
Likewise in specific relation to urban governance, t he rally towards data -driven  decision 
making is being pitched as a means to reform policy and better deliver on urban 
development goals . The Smart Cities Mission launched by India’s  central government in 
2015 is one such  initiative towards using  big d ata for urban governance and admi nistration, 
with ambitions spanning  from  rational ising traffic route s through GIS to predictive profiling 
for surveillance. Given that the world of big data is known to cast such long shadows, why 
does it continue to have such resonance with decision -makin g bodies? What hopes are we 
pinning on data for fairness of outcomes and the future of equity?  
 
Anticipating Risk? Thinking Data?  
 
We face  unprecedented rates of urbanisat ion in the world, with cities  across Africa, Central 
and Latin America, and most of A sia carrying the lion’s share of this burden . This brings an 
urgent need for  mitigat ion against risk susceptibility and for  social equity , without which the 
sustainability of these cities will fall into question . India, China and Nigeria will cumulatively 
account for 35% of the projected growth in the world’s urban population between 2018 and 
2050.  In absolute numbers, 2050 projections estimate that India will add another 416 
million urban dwellers, while China will contribute 255 million and Nigeria 189 mi llion (UN 
2018). In addition to a rising urban population, demands for energy and water will also be 
                                                      
1 Aadhaar  is based on the e tymological play on  the word ‘basis’ or ‘foundation’ with Sanskrit origins. For 
citizens in India, it is a biometrically -tagged 12 -digit number unique to each individual that is being designed as 
a way to identify and document persons.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
3 
 peaking and that too in much shorter time frames. By 2030, global demand for energy and 
water will see an expected growth of 40 and 50 per cent respectivel y (UN 2016).  
 
While current estimates point out that 1 in 4 will live in a slum by 2030, this scenario is 
bleaker for developing countries where inadequacy of shelter will be a reality for every third 
urban resident.  Hence the urban poor residing in inform al settlements and slums in cities of 
the global South are highly vulnerable to resource scarcity and risk. Whether it may be 
incremental changes and stresses like heat stress, pollution, poverty, induced weather 
extremities or natural disasters, what make s the urban poor in slums particularly susceptible 
to risks is “lack of secure land tenure, lack of access to basic infrastructure and services , and 
overcrowding” (World Bank 2011 :45). 
 
For those on the veritable margins, data is being heralded as the tool  that can give  them 
visibility in discourses where they may have remained so far unaccounted. In the case of 
India with a populatio n of 65 million slum  residents, the potential for producing actionable 
data to reduce poverty and effect change is immense. After over six decades of tepid 
responses of centrally -funded welfare schemes and poverty reduction measures, countries 
like India are stepping into the domain o f data with the hope and intent  of catalysing new 
modalities of urban governance  and of addressing the scarcity and risk that these vulnerable 
populations will increasingly face . While the promise of ICTs as a fast mover was first 
envisioned some  decades ago, the current push for data -driven  governance and ‘marking’ 
citizens has been galva nised by the promise of  digit ising platforms, services and 
records/archives. For ‘invisible’ slums, whose insecure tenure and non -networked nature 
may often keep them off official maps and city plans, this could provide the possibility of a 
crucial break.  
 
We already know, though, that achieving the potential of urban data will not be all plain 
sailing. Ananya Roy (2009), for example, notes exception, informality and invisibility as not 
gaps within but modalities of planning itself . In cities of global S outh, these often come to 
be used as purposive instruments to manage the failure of planned developmentalism. To 
demand visibility is thus a political negotiation against exclusionary discourse of planning 
and policy.  While invisibility may provide temporary tenure and allow life to go on under the 
nose of the state; to make oneself apparent, to demand or negotiate for visibility is a 
political move against being enumerated on terms in which one may have no say  (Warner 
2013). Thus slums confront the city and o ften remind it of many cities that live within it.  
 
Creating and collating data about slums and grounding the origins of this data with the 
community can push the envelope by providing visibility and adding further granul arity to 
what is known about the se areas; an essential foundation to proofing them against a future 
of risk. Yet g overnment and municipal authorities have been faced with the temptation to 
enumerate and mark residents of informal settlements in limited ways , and the chall enge of 
going furth er than this . Linnet Taylor (2017) argues that in low -income environments 
accuracy a nd granularity of data capture  remains a practical difficulty  for government 
authorities and urban local bodies. This is very much a  reality for Indian cities which have 
high density slums that are constantly under the process of incremental building and have a 
high rate of attrition (Ghertner 2016).  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
4 
 So, w hile the promise of data -driven  decision -making is real , what does this mean in 
everyday practice?  First, as just noted,  there are  challenges in the very process o f collecting 
and analysing data, such as the complexity of capturing the details  of dense slums in Indian 
cities and the political implications of this process . But more importantly, even if such data 
can be gathe red, there are real -time dilemmas and impediments in making use of it for  
evidence -based civic participation. Thus , analysing the issues that plague this practice 
especially for communities residing in info rmal settlements in the global S outh not only has 
potential to improve operational efficiency of processes but also to better deliver on goals 
of social equity and justice.  
 
Mahil a Housing Trust (MHT) is an Ahmedabad -based NGO that has been working with slum 
communities for over two decades in areas o f habitat upgradation, improving livelihoods 
and productivity, and building climate resilience. Over the course of the last 25 years, MHT 
has attempted to create both broad -range and particularised data to understand the 
demographics and deliver on the nee ds of communities and households in informal 
settlements across eight states in India. With a deeply embedded community -based and 
community -led model, MHT’s on -ground practice attempts to real ise this process of moving 
from data to knowledge and subsequent ly to action not only ‘in’ but ‘with’ slum 
communities.  
 
In partnering with communities, there is a deliberate push for obtaining data of high  
contextual accuracy but this simultaneously makes  maintaining data quality increasingly 
complex. A similar dichot omy exists with using ICT in countries like India  where urban slum 
areas  and smaller towns are still developing the means to conquer digital divides and patchy 
telecommunication capacities. Tussles  over data ownership and agenda -setting roadblocks 
continue  to structure outcomes of data -driven  decision making for slum communities on 
individual and collective scales.  
 
Given these challenges, the central questions of this case study focus on two core issues 
within the larger spectrum of  concerns for data justi ce. First, issues of accuracy, digit ising 
data and the use of ICT; and second , issues of ownership and  translating data -driven  
knowledge into actionable forms. Through these, th is case study engages with the existing 
discourse on data justice  and attempts to bring out real -time challenges of the process of 
data creation and the potential held in producing actionable data that communities may use 
in making governance and planning processes more accountable.  
 
The subsequent section elaborates on the central a nalytical framework used in this study 
i.e. the ‘information value chain’ adapted from the work of Richard Heeks and Satyarupa 
Shekhar ( Heeks and Shekhar 2019). Details on the methodology used  for developing the 
study  are presented in the following section . Findings detail how barriers and real-time  
challenges emerging from on -ground practice structure pro -equity development initiatives 
in order to reflect on the information value chain  in practice from  the context of developing 
cities in India. Reflections  emerging from the case study analysis are presented in the 
concluding section  with recommendations for a future agenda . 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
5 
 B. Background  
 
Scholars and policymakers have acknowledged that developmental agendas in the 
contemporary world have moved on from be ing merely informed to bein g driven by data 
(Taylor 2017 ). Despite this technological overhaul in structuring the governmental agenda, 
the domain of data and its potency can be circumscribed for many parts of the population. 
Cross linking, mining and deplo ying data carries risks of further exclusions and reinforcing 
inequalities especially for those on the margins. For instance, who gets framed as key 
perpetrators in the data on air quality in Delhi indicates not just the stakes but also the 
politics of dat a representation and speaks of the power inscribed within the collection and 
presentation of large -scale  digital datasets.  In the process of datafication, a farmer can be a 
data point divorced from issues of soil salinity, ground water shortage or crop failure, as 
s/he seems located within a system but divorced from its structural deprivations. In the 
process of assigning blame  for air quality in the capital, d oes the responsibility of inner -city 
industries producing noxious fumes or private motorised vehicular traffic get subsumed in 
the larger narrative of pollution spikes due to stubble burning by farmers in North India? 
Who gets penalised in legal proceedings may often flow from the results of these 
representations; and in this case lead to hefty penalties on the middle - and small -scale 
farmers who supply Delhi with its grains ( Mukerjee and Goswami 2016 ). 
 
The ability of data  to frame narratives or drive agendas speaks of a larger ecosystem and 
how it interacts with  the core data processes of any initiative, project or information 
system. Those core data processes can be understood as an ‘information value chain’  (see 
Figure 1 ). The information value chain model used by Heeks and Shekhar (2019) visualises  
the process of datafication with its constituents at upstream, midstream and downstream 
stages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 . The information value chain (adapted from Heeks & Shekhar 2019)  
 
 
Larger structural realities and socio -economic vectors sit around these core data processes.  
They not merely influence information value chains but get consequently shaped by the 
results and outcomes of information produced through datafication. The entangled nature 
of data and broader contextual reality thus urges a deeper look into the upstream  (e.g.  
needs, tools and  collection processes), midstream (e.g. processing and analysis ), and 
Knowledge  
Learning  
Data  
- Source  
- Capture  
 
Information  
- Process  
- Output  
Decisions  
 Actions  
Upstream  
 Midstream  
 Downstream  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
6 
 downstream (e. g. decision making, action plan  dissemination  and enactment ) components 
of the information value chain . These can therefore be seen to either  counter or reinforce 
discrimination,  redress or perpetuate invisibility for those without so cial privileges,  
empower communities or sever their rights , etc . 
 
What can data justice mean in such a scenario? Richard Heeks and Jaco Renken define data 
justice as “the primar y ethical standard by which data -related resources, processes and 
structures are evaluated” (Heeks and  Renken 2018 :92). They  break this down i nto different 
dimensions like instrumental data justice (fair use of data and its outcomes), procedural 
data justi ce (fair handling and management of data), distributive data justice (fair 
distribution of data) . Threading Amartya Sen’s capability approach within this idea imparts 
agency and emphas ises the interlinkages of data/evidence  and decision making to improve 
life opportunities ( ibid. ). An information value chain hence functions and thrives within an 
ecosystem of social action, interest groups  and other external factors which  all come to bear 
on the production, operation and outcome of the value chain . 
 
While th e information value chain model (Heeks and Shekhar 2019) provides a central 
framework for this study, the arguments presented here build upon how this might work in 
real-time  practice and what that could mean when one speaks of data justice. It attempts to  
foreground the dynamics of heterogeneous experiences of ICT and digital reach, iterative 
datafication techniques , and limitations in human proficiency for turning data/evidence  into 
action . These are  issues that remain true for a wide majority of slum res idents in Indian 
cities and hold an overarching influence in not just the data outcomes but the process of 
datafication itself. A capability or a choice to shape data outcomes may be highly varied 
across different locational and socio -economic contexts ; not just for individuals but 
organisations like MHT itself  which  attempt to strike balances between pro -poor advocacy 
and producing unbiased data sets.  
 
What this effectively suggests is the urgent need to ensure data use is open, accountable, 
effective and responsible especially when data intermediaries (organ isations working in the 
zone between the state and the citizens) frame and actualise pro -data equity initiatives. 
Linnet Taylor notes that, “the framing of data justice … operates at the highest level – where 
the social contract is shaped and negotiated  – and at the most basic,  in the practices of 
everyday  … life” (Taylor 2017:11). Given this all -encompassing influence in an increasingly 
datafying milieu, there remains a significant need and potential fo r building “ethical paths” 
(Taylor 2017:2) and embedding a social justice agenda within the larger ecosystem of 
datafying developmental regimes (Ta ylor 2017, Heeks and Renken 2018 ). In the case of 
action -oriented projects being run for and/or in slum commu nities, this takes on particular 
forms and challenges.  
 
Given the digital divide and existing socio -structural hierarchies, data related issues – who 
collects the data, for what purpose, using what tools for collection, with what level of 
participation of  the community and what  availability and openness of data sets, how data is 
framed or harvested, and what balance exists  between privacy and representation and  
between accuracy and manipulation – all shed  light on the multiple intersecting streams of 
contes tation that lie across the information value chain. While discussing Bowker and Star’s 
idea of efficacious systems, Taylor extrapolates that a good, usable system becomes so Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
7 
 convenient that it disappears and only its answers remain (Taylor 2017:6). Similar ly, the 
‘work’ in a data -driven  world carries a messy underbelly of stakes, interests, costs and 
controls which catalyse processes even as they remain in the foreground; while the 
information they hold travels and is harnessed across different contexts or purposes.  
 
While it remains impossible to eliminate the effects of all of these challenges, using a data 
justice framework allows for bringing self -reflexivity into working with/through data. Hence 
this study uses the information value chain as a starting point to analyse data -justice -in-
practice by reflecting upon interventions and action -oriented projects. The two core issues it 
identifies attempt to highlight the complexities at two different stages within the 
information value chain from the perspective  of slums  and their residents  in India (see 
Figure 2). The first issue is of data accuracy and digit isation of data that pertains to the 
upstream components of information value chains. The second  – focus sing on downstream 
issues  – is that of linking  data ownership to the community as well as the challenges faced 
and potential unlocked in harnessing data/evidence . 
 
 
Figure 2 . Central focus and key questions of the case study  
 
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
8 
 C. Methods  
 
A combination of secondary and primary research is employed for the purposes of the 
study. The key framing issues and literature review is carried out through a secondary 
analysis of some key  literature around data justice as a conceptual categ ory and a modular 
form. In addition, the study is pivoted on a critical evaluation of Mahila Housing Trust’s  own 
experience of working with data through examining illustrative examples, experiences  and 
on-ground learning from three key projects : 
 
• Slum Mapp ing Exercise in Ranchi (ongoing):  The project was a slum boundaries, 
infrastructure and service delivery indicator mapping exercise done via community 
participation in order to produce digit ised, updated and geo -tagged maps for 20 
informal settlements whic h have remained largely invisible  to date within urban 
governance in the city . The process was based on translating paper maps made via 
community collaboration and household -level data  collected via mobile apps by trained 
MHT personnel onto geo -referenced formats for community awareness and 
mobil isation as well as public advocacy.  
 
• Energy Audits in Ahmedabad (ongoing):  The Energy Audit project is a community -led 
energy mapping exercise where women leaders from the community (trained by MHT) 
in Ahmed abad  collect household data about energy exp enditure and requirements. 
Post -analysis, families from informal settlements were provided with custom ised 
solutions through microloans, energy -efficient  products and suggestions based  on their 
household layout, need and  capacity to pay. The collection was carried out by 
community wome n through audit tools and paper -based surveys processed and 
analyzed at MHT with the onus of decision making and action plans on the community 
itself. The project aimed to ultimately  develop  the capacities of community -based 
organ isation s to monitor and maintain infrastructure involving them in meter reading 
and the supply and payment of bills.  
 
• Global Resilie nce Partnership Challenge (GRP) -supported project building climate 
resilience for the urban po or (2015 -17): The project titled “Women's Action towards  
Climate Resilience for Urban Poor” was run in seven  cities of South  Asia to co -create 
data  and action plans on housing typologies, climate risk and current conditions at the 
household and  slum level. Collected through mobile apps and shared with the 
community, it allow ed for them to create community -level plans and mobil ise towards 
ensuring public accountability.  
 
Primary evidence on challenges and reflections on data justice in practice w as collected 
through qualitative research tools such as unstructured interviews and focus group 
discussion s (FGDs) . All primary work was conducted between January -April 2019. The FGDs 
were targeted towards three different levels of data 'agents' or stakeho lders wi thin the 
organ isation,  each of whom play vital roles in shaping  project design,  what kinds of data we 
seek, what tools are used to handle  and secure the data,  but also shaping how data is  
circulat ed and used.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
9 
 These levels correspond to:  on-ground field team, data management team, and senior 
management at MHT. The field team  is the key data gathering unit  and work s closely with 
the community. For the purposes of this study, the field team from MHT’s local office in 
Ranchi in Jharkhand was involved d ue to th e challenging, diverse and wide -ranging project 
portfolio of ongoing projects at that location. The data management team not only design 
research tools and survey timelines but perform various upstream and downstream tasks 
like ensuring training of  surveyors, aiming for maintenance of research ethics in the field , 
handling software and back -end processes, checking and cleaning data,  and handling its 
analysis and presentation. They include a variety of consultants and outside experts as per 
the need of the project and mostly work out of the head office in Ahmedabad . The team has 
been moving towards central ising data bases through an MIS system for ease of operations 
and higher consistency.  
 
The third nodal point for FGDs was the senior management who set agendas and steer the 
work of our projects and organ isation at large. These may include but are not limited to 
those who are in direct contact with donors, policy makers, sector experts, researchers , etc . 
This level includes those key members from MHT who decide what data may be needed, 
how th e data reports may be presented and  shared , and how  knowledge that is produced 
through our work gets disseminated.  
 
 
D. Findings  
 
D1. ‘Fixing them on the maps’  
 
The moving parts of a machine often determine its collective function but to unpack the 
‘process’ of datafication is to grapple with  an emergent form  whose life and creation remain  
inherently under flux. What happens if the idea of a norm is no longer static but shifting due 
to the realities in which it i s achieved? How and where does one set a benchmark or fix data 
points? The question of defining data accuracy presents such dilemmas in the practice of 
creating data for slums in Indian cities where discontinuity and inconsistency often puncture 
the idea o f achieving accuracy.  
 
In many smaller Indian cities that are still transitioning from predominantly rural to urban 
forms, like their counte rparts elsewhere in the global S outh, informal settlements due to 
the insecurity of their tenure and disrupted domes ticity either fall off the map or remain 
hard to capture. They continually mutate or incrementally build in relationship with the 
externalities they encounter from eviction, heat stress, civil strife to disasters , etc (e.g. 
Chandran 2019) . To capture these  marginalised communities and aim for data accuracy 
through the use of ICT remains equal parts potential and challenge. To use community 
participation as a means of improving accuracy and create data from the ground up can 
provide added granularity to GIS maps or drone mapping that may rely solely on remote 
sensing or official survey maps.  However the experience of immersive fieldwork and 
community involvement also raises concerns over local conflicts, exposure to induced 
errors, and technological hurdles in remote locations which posit  accuracy as not an 
unattainable but a shifting norm.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
10 
  
For instance, we can take MHT’s experience in the ongoing s lum mapping exercise in Ranchi 
undertaken  through a  complementary process of field -based studies and subsequent  
digit isation of slum surveys and service mapping via GIS . This  illustrates some of the  
dilemmas in seeking to ensure  data justice. Essentially the project was devised as an 
iterative process of following four stages  (see Figure 3 ). The first stage involve d immersive 
fieldwork and iterative processes to map slum boundaries and enumerate households. 
While the slum boundary mapping was a collaborative effort between field teams from MHT 
and community resident s, the household -level data was collected by traine d field surveyors 
from the organisation itself. The next stage involved digit ising these into geo -tagged 
formats. To this another layer of data was overlaid by collecting information about 
household particulars and service levels within the community. In t he fourth stage, this 
information was collated, verified and presented in the form of digit ised slum maps for 
communities which have remained on the margins of state discourses and planning 
paradigms, in order to initiate public advocacy and to initiate co mmunity -led demands upon 
the state for civic entitlements in informal settlements.  
Figure 1. Steps for slum mapping in Ranchi in MHT's ongoing Slum Mapping project  
 
The s lum mapping exercise in Ranchi was highly dependent on community knowledge to 
establish settlement boundaries and service deficiencies in the settlements for enabling 
service provision and furthering advocacy. While a participatory exercise improved chances 
of community control over how  their reality was captured, this came at a cost where higher 
chances of inducing manual error, the environment with slums , and attrition rates all 
shaped outcomes. MHT’s Ranchi field team explained  that problems arose from a range of 
issues. Illegal subdi viding of houses for rental yields kept changing total numbers of houses 
for each slum as new doors and temporary partitions often sprang up in subsequent visits to 
the same slum. Locked houses due to seasonal migration or high incidence of daily wage 
labo ur left verification processes reliant on  secondary and tertiary sources which often 
became the neighbours or village -level officers who had little idea about the on -ground 
situation . Topographical inaccessibility such as open drains and  low-level  areas wh ich were  
flood -prone  also made coverag e of entire settlements and in -person investigation harder 
especially during monsoons. Organic street network s and fuzzy settlement boundaries due 
to constantly building and shifting within the settlement made fixing s treet segmentation 
and clear boundaries on digit ised formats an inherently unfinished business.  
 
In these cases triangulation  of data gathering became necessary (for inst ance, asking 
respondents, cross -checking with neighbours and  via personal observation) .  But surveyors 
were often put in decision -making dilemmas, whether their intervention towards achieving 
accuracy meant inducing bias as a corollary to reducing error. Illegal service connections 
were observed and often reported by field teams in cases wh ere a true picture at the slum 
level would benefit from reporting the truth about the household -level picture. Field STAGE 1 -
MAPPING
Paper 
mapping via 
community 
participationSTAGE 2 -
DIGITISATION
Geo-tag 
households and 
fix slum 
boundariesSTAGE 3 -DATA
COLLECTION
Collect 
demographic 
details at slum 
and household 
levelSTAGE 4 -
DIGITAL 
MAPPING
Create 
digitised 
slum mapsManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
11 
 officers also noted higher accuracy in household -level  data when slum residents perceived 
that they would be beneficiaries of targeted proj ects rather than participating in 
background exercises for advocacy such as the slum mapping exercise. The field teams 
stated  that they operated on a 70 -90% confidence level in terms of data accuracy where 
micro details may only be gathered through using p roxy indicators and/or attempting 
triangulation  through asking  the respondent, their neighbour and self -observation. ‘Fixing 
them on  the maps’ and ‘making the maps’ were hurdles which were constantly  being 
negotiated in the field.  
 
As a data intermediary, working in local contexts also meant dealing with low technological 
proficiency  and testing field conditions. The p otential of digit ising information about slums 
through ICT faced high barriers in Ranchi where network issues, limited literacy of field 
surveyors and respondents as well as geographical inaccessibility produce d impediments to 
creation of data and to translating data  into legible and actionable forms.  Patchy mobile 
network connectivity and use of basic devices often led to time lags and poo r records of 
locational accuracy during geo -tagging procedures. For instance household -level  surveys 
were often backlogged due to unavailability of data services in informal settlements in the 
periphery of the city. It also resulted in delayed updating of survey forms and in extreme 
cases, mobile device operating system crashes or jumbling of back -end data.  
 
Building staff capacity and maintaining trust with communities was and remains an ongoing  
challenge. For MHT, building commun ity trust has been a core focus  which entails a long 
drawn -out period of informal field visits, interacting with the community and understanding 
their needs as well as laying foundations for build ing community -based organ isations in the 
informal settlement s across Ranchi where MHT  is working. This initial trust -building process 
takes around 3-6 months  and usually precedes the project or other need -based collecting of 
data .  If absent, it  can lead to sources of bias  and inaccuracy . From MHT’s experience, it is 
increasingly apparent t hat data accuracy is directly proportional to levels of mutual trust 
and intended benefits. Field teams noted that residents of informal settlements shared 
more accurate data when the y have familiarity with and trust  the surveyors / organisation . 
 
Women -led teams also encountered hostility and uncomfortable situations at times. Cases 
were reported of catcalling as well as questioning of women surveyors by male slum 
residents who were drunk and/or felt threatened by the presence of female surveyors in 
their settlement collecting data. This forced the organisation to have male members within 
the team in order to ensure safety. Such involuntary considerations as well as disruptions in 
the field not only increased the time lag in data collection but also bore fi nancial 
consequences for  the project. A detailed flowchart of the challenges faced at each step is 
presented in the Appendix.  
 
Experiences from practice urge a rethinking of the idea of data accuracy : not as  a static 
benchmark but a shifting norm structur ed by the on -ground realities including its emergent 
milieu and conflicting stakeholder interests especially in areas whose ontology is constantly 
under flux. While the community felt empowered in terms of participating in c reating data 
and being visible, there still remained discomfort and hesitation in sharing household -level  
information due to the perceived illegality of their status.  Use of ICT facilitated digit isation 
processes but led to entry level barriers and operational hindrances for local resear ch teams Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
12 
 and the community. Overcoming processual lags and ensuring validity was thus an 
incremental effort which was enabled through purposive decision making and multiple 
rounds of cleaning and re -verification. Inducing bias during datafication was wager ed 
against presenting a real-time  picture of informal settlements and their needs, while 
minim ising their exposure to punitive action from state and non -state actors.  
 
How context itself shapes the benchmark for data accuracy reveals the contested territory 
of fixing data while working with information value chains. It reveals that the structural data 
justice  framework holds up a more destabilised and messy world of iter ative processes  and 
interactions within action -oriented projects in informal settlements where feedback loops, 
hierarchies of knowledge and technique, and constant shifts shape more than just the form 
that data takes.  
 
D2. Data ownership and t ranslating data/evidence  into action  
 
Another central focus for data justice discourse has been ensuring  that ownership and 
control of the data created about individuals and communities remains accessible, 
understandable and actionable for them, in contrast to the inte ntions for big data . For 
Taylor (2017), who advocates building ethical paths in a dataf ying milieu, balancing between 
integrating the freedom to be seen and represented appropriately with the freedom to be 
unseen and free from intervention  remains a centra l concern and in practice, a constant 
challenge. With the marketplace for data expanding drastically – making data one of the 
most precious and potent commodities in the world today  – democratising its access and 
routes to its use for shaping outcomes has become even more indispensable. Data 
intermediaries , especially those working for developmental and pro -equity initiatives , need 
to push for ensuring that communities remain a vital stakeholder in not just generating but 
owning and using  the data generated  through them, even if translating data/evidence  into 
actionable forms may prove to be a variegated experience. Community empowerment is 
pivotal in translating data/evidence  into actionable for m: merely making data/evidence 
available to a community does no t necessarily  translate into desired action.  
 
What are the real possibilities of creating data ownership amongst communities? 
Additionally can we rethink slum residents as integral parts of information value chains at 
different stages : from upstream cataly sts like research surveyors to data/evidence -driven 
action agents? Experiences from ongoing projects provide a highly diverse scenario in this 
regard with every project, location and context defining its own set of hierarchies, hurdles 
and possibilities.  
 
The energy audit  project run by MHT in cities like Ahmedabad provides an interesting 
example. As part of the project, MHT trains women leaders from slum communities to work 
as energy auditors in the households within their communities where they audit households 
on the ba sis of their energy usage by generating and collating data on electricity bills, 
consumption and family preferences. The auditing tool they use maps the existing layout of 
the interior of a  dwelling and the light sources and  spatial use given many dwelling s also 
double as workspaces for their residents. This mapping helped the women leaders 
themselves and family members of the households in question to understand how they 
used their home spaces for different ac tivities. Improvements are then suggested  in th e Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
13 
 location of light points e.g.  split ting the light points to give focused brightness but using 
lower wa ttage sources.  
 
Up to this point , MHT has trained a group of nine  women across Ahmedabad, who now 
work as energy auditors for the ir community. While on the one hand the training 
empowered community members in creating and analysing their own energy needs, the 
communities remain dependent on trained experts and architects on second -order issues 
such as devising la yout -based solutions for each household. Th e process strengthened the 
community in domains of awareness and decision making at the household  level as it 
prioritised the involvement and needs of the famil ies it aimed to study and benefit. The 
initial gains on dat a/evidence -driven action were  taking shape through decision making  on 
energy consumption and shifts being made on the level of the household to tackle heat 
stress, ventilation and low lighting issues as well as improvement in storage capacity and 
spatial usage within the household unit. By ke eping the process and solution localised and 
indicative rather than directive , the families and community had greater control over the 
data -driven  solutions they wanted to experiment with and invest in. Most of the data 
collection was still done through pa per and usage of electrical equipment such as 
voltmeters required significant external support . Local  identities, politics  and socio -
economic  conditions still h eld a significant impact on what action could  stem from  the 
awareness that is generated.  
 
Additionally these energy auditors also introduce low -cost, energy -efficient solutions and 
products manufactured by MHT through subsid ised means.  Through its network of women 
energy auditors, MHT has sold sustainable energy products such as LED lights, smo keless 
cook stoves, solar lanterns and solar lighting , and cooling systems to more than 27,500 slum 
families across 10 cities in India. Yet this network made the women in the community 
answerable and accountable to the organisation. The data being collecte d was held in a 
central repository at MHT which had the final say on its usag e. The process of democratising 
all the way along the information value chain hence remains far from over and requires 
more work. Ev en while one domain may acquire  more openness o r robustness, others 
produced new hierarchies in terms of how data was processed  or where it was sought to be 
deployed.  
 
While the energy audit process trains community women to recogn ise and devise solutions 
for rational ising their energy needs at househo ld and neighbourhood level,  the umbrella 
project for women -led climate resilience building under  the Global Resilience Partnership 
(2015 -17) pushed the agenda of data/evidence -driven  civic participation further along the 
road to  achieving data justice. Bas ed o n evaluating, harnessing and improving community 
capacity in seven  cities across South Asia2, the project, with its process methodology 
detailed in Figure 4, was designed to shift the sustainability quotient and driving gear of the 
datafication and act ion planning process into the hands of the community. The project was 
conceptualised to  ensure : 
 
                                                      
2 Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Jaip ur and Ranchi in India, Kathmandu in Nepal, and Dhaka in 
Bangladesh.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
14 
 If the urban poor are provided with the requisite knowledge to undertake 
vulnerability and risk assessments and are equipped with accessible  resilient  
technol ogies, they will be able to devise and implement locally relevant and pro -poor 
climate resilient solutions. If the poor are empowered to implement their own 
resilience plans, and the institutional mechanisms representing their voices are in 
place, they wil l be able to better influence city planning and governance on pro -poor 
adaptation and  resilience action  (MHT 2017:ii)  
 
 
 
Figure 4 . Methodology for carrying out MHT's climate resilience building 
program me at community level under GRP  
Premised on building  community -based organ isations  (CBOs)  and their active proponents 
called community  action groups  (CAGs)  at the slum level, community participation was 
central in each stage from collecting data to training to negotiation of action agendas by 
interacting wi th local municipal authorities. The GRP project allowed community action 
groups to form community -based  action plans for each site according to their own priorities 
against the identified risks of water inundation, flooding, heat stress and ve ctor-borne  
diseases. Use of data/ evidence in setting priorities  – not just for local decision making but 
for improving governance  – pivoted on motivating and externally supporting community 
mobil isation based on data/ evidence at the slum level which was being genera ted for the 
first time and pushing them to urge for i nclusivity in local governance.  
 
Some of the success towards this goal included community leaders from slums in 
Ahmedabad being made stakeholders in devising municipal authority Heat Action Plan s; in 
Bhopal they were invited by the city municipality’s  Malaria Dep artment to undertake vector 
surveillance in other slums; whereas in Ranchi community leaders man aged to push for 
including rain water harvesting incentives in local  implementation of the na tional -level 
housing policy , Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana. The women in the community were slowly 
trained to identify and understand technical terms and conceptual categories like climate 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
15 
 change, risk, heat stress, vector -borne  diseases, green roof  – ideas  that will permeate into 
the memory and vocabulary of the community over a longer, more sustained period of time. 
New initiatives such as climate saathis  (partners) and child doctors were in stituted to 
involve adolescents within the community.  
 
Despite the  positive response from the community and growing platforms for them to 
interact in local governance, many challenges still remain. The GRP programme provided the 
first push towards participatory processes where slum communities could interact  with 
governm ent to demand entitlements or better provisions but requires scaling for this effect 
to bring a significant change in how communication channels in local contexts are 
structured. The research design for a major portion of the household data collection 
exer cise was undertaken by MHT’s research teams who collected, collated and analysed the 
datasets produced cross multiple sites.  A significant amount of training and external support 
remained necessary throughout and after the project in measuring and collatin g 
temperature variations, or maintenance o f equipment for installed green roofs and modular 
roofs.  
 
While the community members played a participatory role in producing data and deciding 
what forms it could take while translating evidence into community -level action plans as 
was envisioned in the initial project design, their role in taking it to the level of participation 
in local  governance remained dependent on MHT’s support , from organising women leaders 
to fixing meetings or creating platforms for enga gement. On different occasions, 
interactions between stakeholders at meetings with local authorities had to be facilitated by 
MHT. Often the agenda setting and modes of intervening in local decision making were 
devised at the organisational level and diffu sed into community meeting s, later being picked 
up by them and pursued depending on their feasibility.  
 
Additionally while data collection and action plans still possessed an active component of 
co-creation at the community level, the downstream channel of  data dissemination was 
narrower than desired due to logistical issues  and privacy concerns. As a result, collated 
datasets were managed and rema ined with MHT itself even if their  broad results were used 
by the community members. While data justice aims to close  the loop on accessibility and 
dissemination of data/evidence  for the communities who may be represented through it, 
deficits in terms of organisational planning about how this could be made available to them 
as well as prevalence of digital illitera cy amongst slum residents hampered the cause of 
open access and free use of post -analysis trends and evidence on  risk and resilience 
capacity.  
 
As illustrative examples, both the energy audit and GRP project present different scales and 
modes of how slum r esidents generated data/evidence  and participated in decision making.  
For the energy audits, data creation and its concerted use was squarely at household and 
community level. This made the transition to action  comparatively easier. The local 
dynamics and household consideration s determined interactions and responses, where 
dependence on organisational support for technical proficiency and solutions remained 
considerable. In this case , the  field surveyor, data analyst and decision maker are all from 
and wit hin the community  – a relatively rare scenario. This was enabled through 
empowering and training the community. While these required  high MHT involvement in Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
16 
 the primary stages, it eased community reach and closing of the loop from knowledge to 
action.  
 
With GRP, the community’s dependence on MHT for understanding issues, building and 
mobil ising the community , and catalysi ng their interactions with city -level decision makers 
remained significant. Results for data analysis were shared with the community but t he 
collated and analysed databases were held at the organisation level. Even while these 
remained accessible fo r community members, making them  practically usable  has remained 
challenging due their  digit ised form. Demonstrative results from the analysed data such as 
results from water testing or vector -eradication  drives was what the community largely 
relied on to understand and prioritise their resilience strategies. As complexity of data 
collection, analysis and decision -making  process increases, commun ity participation and 
ownership becomes harder to ensure yet necessary for enabling free and fair use of data ; 
i.e. necessary for data justice . 
 
 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
The projects and experiences from the field provide insights on both upstream a nd 
downstream issues  of information value chains. The slum mapping exercise in Ranchi brings 
in contextual learnings relevant to similar locations undergoing rural -urban transitions and 
seeing high rates of attrition and incremental building in informal se ttlements. Their 
location and topographical conditions produce challenges of access for fieldworkers and for 
fixing them in digit ised and geo -tagged formats with cohesiveness and complete accuracy. 
In addition, high political stakes and ten ure insecurity d rive communities  to make conflicting 
or inconsistent claims that push field r esearchers to triangulate  data and make choices 
between correcting or inducing bias.  The upstream stages of information value chains 
remain extremely entangled in practice i.e. mo ving back and forth due to procedural and 
ethical dilemmas of fixing accuracy. Further , digital divides and limited diffusion of ICT have  
meant that it often create s hurdles for both researchers and the community in  
implementing  research as well as transla ting information into action. Hurdles such as  low 
network connectivity , limited ICT diffusion  and low digital literacy change the discursive 
domain of what can be achieved in the course of enumerating and mapping slum s. 
 
On the other hand, experiences from  practice in the energy audit programme and GRP 
project help reflect on how issues of data ownership and challenges to data -driven  civic 
engagement shape the downstream effects of information value chain operations.  While 
the energy audit was at the settle ment level and improved chances of keeping the 
information value chain operation grounded and community -led, on macro, multi -city scales 
like those in GRP this became harder. Slum communities in Ahmedabad needed support and 
handholding in enabling action t hrough data/evidence -driven  negotiations. Socio -economic 
conditions, gender biases, literacy levels, and digital illiteracy continue to be entry barriers 
in pushing for desired outcomes. Creating chances for data -driven  civic engagement 
required  ongoing  organisational support and facilitation . Data ownership in the case of GRP 
at least remained circumscribed to the domains of intermediaries, research organisations or 
state actors. While this process of using data/evidence -driven  action is getting Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
17 
 democra tised, representation of macro data sets, rules for access and maintenance of e -
repositories remains harder to decentral ise. 
 
Improving MHT’s own data and project documentation has also been a challenge that the 
organ isation continues to strive for. Buildi ng consistency in our data collection and handling 
will allow for better preparedness towards improving channels for access.  In addition, 
another key learning from ensuring data justice in practice is to build the familiarity and 
capacity of working with d igital formats for those within the organ isation as well as the 
communities. Developing technical knowhow and capacity building by intermediaries like 
MHT which work at grassroots level may  be a step towards improve the  ability of slum 
communities to effec tively understand, handle and yield their data in future.  Another 
learning has been towards developing data collection tools that incorporate multiple 
formats suitable to support triangulation . For instance , survey questionnaires for 
respondents that incor porate input medi a such as audio an d taking geo -tagged photograph s 
of locations improve data cleaning processes and accuracy levels.  
 
While the promise of data justice could restructure hierarchies, the new forms of 
dependenc ies being created also need att ention. For info rmal settlements in the global 
South not just digital literacy but literacy  more generally  remain an unfinished g oal; yet a 
basic foundation for data justice in a digitising world. ICTs can play a role to democratise  and 
dece ntralise datafi cation processes but only if we  move towards fairness of use and 
representation , and enable a rights -based discourse  that balances the need to be seen with  
the right  to determine how and the space to refuse . A contextually -grounded evaluation of 
the work of information value chains allows us to consider the domain of possibilities 
against contours of impediments , both of which  remain inherent in the process es of a data -
driven  environment. The discussion on data justice in MHT’s case study runs across multi ple 
registers. First, the case study allows us to engage with logistical or ethical concerns that 
emerge in practice such as dealing with concerns regarding efficacy versus limits of ensuring 
accuracy,  and working in technologically -deficient locations or with conflicting interests. 
Second, the analysis of the projects illustrating data/evidence -driven  engagement highlights 
how data can intervene in the lives led by the urban poor and in the  challenges that 
continue to plague them.  
 
A future research agenda  towards building data justice into practice needs to focus on 
better understanding of capacity -building interventions with communitie s; particularly 
identifying strategies for them to actively engage with and own the process of creating 
actionable data fo r change. This requires them to be not merely providers of data but 
stakeholders in the process of envisioning data -driven civic engagement. Another key focus 
for future research will be scaling decentralised data initiatives. In small -scale or 
community -based projects such as energy auditing, there was considerable evidence to 
suggest that the envelope on data ownership and subsequent d ecision making was being 
pushed. However,  this remained a challen ge for macro -projects like GRP.  Building grounded 
framewo rks and models for scaling interventions that aim for data justice in practice 
remain s a necessary next step for a just and fair future.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
18 
 References  
Arora, P.  (2019 ) Benign Dataveillance  - the New Kind of Democracy? Examining the 
Emerging Datafied Governance Systems in India and China , Communicative Figurations, 
Working Paper 24.  ZeMKI, Centre for Media, Communication and Information Research , 
University of Bremen . 
Banerjee, S. (2017) It's time to disentangle the compl ex Aadhaar Debate , The Wire , 20 Apr.  
https://thewire.in/government/aadhar -privacy -analysis  
Chandran, R. (2019) More than 11 million face eviction, displacement as India booms , 
Reuters , 9 Jun. https://in.reuters.com/article/india -landrights -eviction/more -than -11-
million -face -eviction -displacement -as-india -booms -idINKCN1RL2VL  
Ghertner, A. (2015 ) Rule by Aesthetics: World Class C ity Making in Millennial Delhi . OUP, 
New York.  
Heeks, R . & Renken, J. (201 8) Data  justice for development: what would it me an? 
Information Development , 34(1 ), 90 -102.  
Heeks , R. & Shekhar , S. (2019 ) Datafication, development and marginalised urban 
communities: an applied data  justice framework, Information, Communication & Society , 
22(7), 992 -1011.  
MHT (2017) Women’s Action towards Climate Resilience for Urban Poor in South Asia , 
Mahila Housing Trust, Ahmedabad  
Muk erjee,  P. & Goswami, S. (2016 ) Delhi air pollution: identifying p erpetrators and fixing 
responsibi lity, DownToEart h, 7 Nov . https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/air/delhi -
air-pollution -identifying -perpetrators -and-fixing -responsibility -56240  
Roy, A. (2009 ) Why India ca nnot plan its cities: infor mality, insurgence and the idiom of 
urbaniz ation. Planning Theory , 8(1), 76 -87. 
Scott, J. (1998 ) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to I mprove the Human Condition 
have Failed . Yale University Press, New Haven , CT. 
Taylor, L.  ( 2017 ) What is data jus tice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms 
globally. Big Data & Society , 1-14. 
UN. (2016 ) Urbanization and Development: Emerging Futures, W orld Cities Report  2016 . UN-
HABITAT , Nairobi.  
UN. (2018 ) 2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects . UNDESA, New York.  
Warner, G. (2013) In Kenya, using tech to put an 'invisible' slum on the map , Parallels , 17 Jul. 
https:/ /www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2013/07/17/202656235/in -kenya -using -tech -to-
put-an-invisible -slum -on-the-map  
World Bank. (2011 ) Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in Cities . World Bank, Washington, 
DC. 
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Just ice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support from Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . We wish to thank all the members from field teams and 
local offices who work towards improving our reach towards the community and ways of 
knowing them through data and relationships we create  in improving the habitat of non - 
networked slums. But most of all, we remain  grateful towards the residents, communities 
and women from informal settlements  across India who continue to trust us and remain Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
19 
 enthused about activel y shaping the world they inhabit  – through  data, action and their  
unwavering  resilience.  
 
About the Authors  
Bijal Brahmbhatt is currently the Director of Mahi la Housing Sewa Trust (MHT). A c ivil 
engineer by training and having expertise in habitat improvem ent, community 
development, housing finance and urban climate change resilience, she oversees MHT’s 
operations at the national level. She has p roven experience in conceptualis ing, planning, 
managing and providing support for women -led climate resilience pr ogrammes across India. 
Her professional experience has focused on a range of poverty alleviation issues, particularly 
with women, entrepreneurship, slum upgradation, water and sanitation, housing and urban 
planning, housing finance, housing technology and renewable energy.  
 
Siraz Hirani is presently working as Senior Programme Management Specialist at Gujarat 
Mahila Housing Sewa Trust. He is a senior professional w ith over 16 years of strategic and  
operational experience with international development o rgan isations including 8 years in  
leadership positions at global and  national level. He holds an M Sc in Disaster Mitigation,  
MSc in Life Science and MBA with specialis ation in Finance. He is an alumnus  of the Harvard 
Kennedy School with work experience in mult i-cultural and challenging countries like India, 
Bangl adesh, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and  Myanmar. He has proven capability in strategic 
planning, program me management, policy development, change management, fund raising, 
forging partnership s and talent man agement. His sectoral experience includes disaster risk 
management, humanitarian aid, habitat development, water and sanitation , health, and 
livelihood s and  governance.  
 
Neha Lal is Senior Research Associate at Gujarat Mahila Housing S ewa Housing Trust and 
works on research, documentation and capacity building at MHT. She holds a Masters and 
MPhil in Sociology from Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi and works on the 
intersections of issues of housing, citizenship, urban governa nce and planning. Her M Phil 
thesis looked at the changing terms of citizenship and rights of belonging for urban poor in 
millennial Delhi. She was also an Urban Fellow at the Indian Institute of Human Settlements, 
Bangalore. Neha has lived in multiple Indi an cities , workin g on issues of housing rights, 
governance, water and sanitation  and urban infrastructure, contemporary history and urban 
ecology.  
 
Bhumika Chauhan is a postg raduate in ICT, Agriculture and  Rural Development from 
Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information Communication Technology, Gandhinagar, India. 
At MHT, she has been working on developing research and documentation tools , GIS 
portals, a vulnerability calc ulator and community ki osk, and automated indoor hydroponics 
systems that focus on providing tech nological solutions to poor communities. With multiple 
years of experience in IT project ma nagement, GIS and programming languages, Bhumika’s 
work focuses on designing and promoting innovative technological solutions for poor 
communities living in informal settlements in order to mitigate their exposure risk, enable 
knowledge transfer and push for political advocacy.   Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
20 
 Appendix : Slum Mapping Steps and Challenges  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stage 01  
MAPPING  
Paper m apping via 
community 
participation  
  
Stage 02  
DIGITIS ATION  
Geo-tag h ousehold s and 
fix slum boundaries  
  
Stage 03  
DATA COLLECTION  
Collect demographic details 
at slum and household level  
  
Stage 04  
DIGITAL MAPPING  
Create digitis ed slum 
maps  
  
1    MAPPING  
Staff Capacity Building  
Paper mapping without GPS d ata and 
random streetwise  
Segmentation streetwise and collecting GPS 
data of start and end -point  
Recce and GPS data collection of the 
entire area  
Household mapping  - paper / 
satellite mapping  
Review of process and changes based on the 
learning  
Review of process and changes based on the 
learning  
Digitis ation of slum boundary and 
segmentation  
CHALLENGE  
 It was difficult to digitis e 
household from paper map s 
CHALLENGE  
It was diffi cult to  get exact slum 
boundary  
CHALLENGE  
Due to inefficiency of reading 
satellite image s, mappers mark ed 
household at incorrect places  
The trainer was giving training in 
English and there was a 
translator, so language barrier 
was also a big challeng e while 
building staff capacity  
Long durations of the mapping 
process discouraged daily wage 
earning community members 
from actively participating  
CHALLENGE  
We dropped one slum ’s mapping 
in-between since area was very 
dense and was very confusing.  
GIS is very technical. It took a 
long time to build capacity of the 
staff 
High rates of alcoholism in tribal 
communities produced  hostile 
situation where field teams were 
pulled back  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
21 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1    MAPPING  
 2    DIGIT ISATION  
Geo-referencing of the satellite image or 
paper maps  
Review of process and changes in 
mapping process based on the 
learning  
Geo-referencing of the satellite image or 
paper maps  
Creati ng household polygon on the 
geo-reference image with the help 
of CAD plugin of QGIS  
 
Map sharing with  field team for data 
collection  
CHALLENGE  
Geo-referencing was very 
difficult in the initial stage, 
when we were not collecting 
GIS data  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
22 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1    MAPPING  
 3    DATA COLLECTION  
Staff Capacity Building  
Training for data collection by using 
mobile application and survey 
questionnaire  
Conducting field survey  
CHALLENGE  
Poor network connectivity  
Checking and cleaning of the data at field 
level  
2    DIGIT ISATION  
CHALLENGE 
Beneficiaries were not 
ready to share all the 
information  
Cleaning and cre ating final data set for 
digitis ing the data and final quality check 
of the data  
Review of data and collection of the 
data again to reso lve the quality 
related issues  
CHALLENGE  
Data quality related issues due to 
capacity related issues of 
surveyors like duplication of the 
data, incorrect information, 
linkage issue, missing household, 
etc.  
CHALLENGE  
Communication gaps 
and limited literacy 
impacted data 
collection.  
Design of the questionnaire 
impacted quality of the collected 
data since it involve d 
technological manoeuvring and 
network support  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 77  
23 
  
 
 
4    DIGITAL MAPPING  
Superimpose actual GIS map slum boundary 
(created during recce and segmentati on time) 
and household polygon s 
Creating attribute table and creating final map 
with respect to land -title (ownership), water 
acce ssibility, toilet availability,  solid waste 
collection, type of house, electricity 
connection, et c. based on the da ta collected 
during the survey  
1    MAPPING  
 3    DATA COLLECTION  
 2    DIGIT ISATION  