Page 1 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04Original Article
Use of interactive voice response technology to address barriers 
to fistula care in Nigeria and Uganda 
Vandana Tripathi1, Elly Arnoff1, Benjamin Bellows2, Pooja Sripad2
1Fistula Care Plus Project, EngenderHealth, Washington, DC, USA; 2Population Council, Washington, DC, USA
Contributions:  (I) Conception and design: All authors; (II) Administrative support: E Arnoff, V T ripathi; (III) Provision of study materials or patients: 
None; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: E Arnoff, P Sripad; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: E Arnoff, P Sripad, V T ripathi; (VI) Manuscript 
writing: All authors; (VII) Final approval of manuscript: All authors.
Correspondence to:  Vandana T ripathi. Fistula Care Plus Project, EngenderHealth, 505 9th Street, Suite 601, Washington, DC, USA.  
Email: vtripathi@engenderhealth.org.
Background: The use of digital health technologies has expanded across low-resource settings, including 
in programs seeking to improve maternal health care seeking and service usage. However, there has been 
limited use of these technologies for screening and referral within maternal health, and many interventions 
have relied on SMS tools, which may have limited impact in settings with low female literacy. Digital health 
technologies have the potential to increase access to care for chronic maternal morbidities, such as obstetric 
fistula, and for women facing stigma, geographic isolation, and other sociocultural barriers to care seeking. 
This study documented the process of developing and implementing an innovative fistula screening and 
referral hotline using interactive voice response (IVR) technology, and described the service usage results and 
stakeholder perspectives associated with the hotline. 
Methods:  The IVR hotline was introduced within the context of a broader Fistula T reatment Barriers 
Reduction Intervention implemented by the USAID-funded Fistula Care Plus project in Ebonyi and Katsina 
states in Nigeria and Kalungu district in Uganda. The intervention used three communication pathways to 
disseminate fistula information and conduct fistula screening: trained community agents, trained primary 
health care providers, and the IVR hotline paired with mass media messaging. All positively-screened women 
were eligible to receive vouchers for free transportation to an accredited fistula treatment center. Quantitative 
and qualitative data on intervention implementation and use across all three communication pathways were 
gathered during intervention implementation, at baseline, midline, and endline; as well as through ongoing 
program monitoring. This study presents findings specifically on service usage and stakeholder perspectives 
related to the IVR hotline. 
Results:  Over a period of ten to twelve months of implementation, depending on the intervention area, 
a total of 566 women completed the IVR hotline screening process. Across the areas, 415 (73%) hotline 
callers screened positive for fistula symptoms. Hotline users and implementation partners reported positive 
impressions of the hotline, particularly the ability to preserve anonymity in seeking information and referral 
for fistula symptoms. Challenges to hotline use included limited mobile phone ownership and poor cellular 
network connectivity, affecting operability by women and community agents. 
Conclusions:  Implementation of the fistula screening hotline suggests that IVR-based interventions may 
be useful in expanding access to health services for stigmatized conditions, particularly in settings where 
literacy is limited. In the current context, such IVR tools require pairing with community and health system 
partners to complete referral and support clients. Further program experience and evaluation research is 
required to understand the options for integrating the IVR hotline or other interventions similarly using 
mobile technologies for screening and referral into broader digital health platforms that are sustained by 
national health systems or commercial business models. 
Keywords:  Maternal health; Africa; sub-Saharan; fistula; digital healthmHealth, 2020 Page 2 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
Introduction
Context of digital health platforms for maternal health 
Digital health technologies have increasingly expanded 
in low-resource settings and are recognized as having the 
potential to improve access to health information and 
services (1). The role of technology-based health platforms in 
accelerating progress toward Universal Health Coverage (2)  
is supported by the 2018 release of the first World 
Health Organization (WHO) guideline for digital health 
interventions (3). 
Although digital health interventions have been used to 
promote maternal and child health in many settings, most 
continue to rely on mobile platforms to “push out” health 
information or to collect data. A recent review of studies 
evaluating digital health tools for maternal and newborn 
health found that health education and promotion was the 
single most common function, used in nearly half (44%) 
of the included papers; and most studies reported use of 
simple, single function digital health tools that do not 
align as well with clients’ varied needs throughout their 
life course (4). Digital health interventions are used less 
frequently to support screening and diagnosis or referral to 
care (4-8). Most digital health technologies for diagnosis 
and referral are designed to support health workers, rather 
than clients or beneficiaries (5,7). 
Chronic maternal morbidity is under-recognized and 
poorly addressed in maternal and child health programs, 
including those using digital technologies. Programs using 
such technologies frequently aim to increase antenatal 
care uptake and facility delivery, and sometimes immediate 
postpartum/newborn care, but seldom address longer-
term post-pregnancy care or design the solution from a 
continuum of care perspective (5,7,9). This gap is evident 
in common frameworks that classify and describe digital 
technologies for health. For instance, the influential 
Information Communication T echnology (ICT) Framework 
for Reproductive, Maternal, Child, and Adolescent Health 
(RMNCAH) does not include maternal health content 
beyond the postnatal period in its array of health topics 
amenable to ICT intervention (10). However, most chronic 
disabilities that may be related to pregnancy, such as fistula, 
pelvic organ prolapse, and anemia, are often not recognized during this immediate phase (11).
Another challenge in realizing the potential of digital 
health technologies to address maternal health needs is the 
common reliance on SMS and similar text-based media (6,7). 
T ext-based digital health interventions require functionally 
literate audiences, and in some low-income populations, 
a significant percentage of women have low literacy. This 
may limit the uptake and effectiveness of digital health 
interventions on the desired health behaviors and outcomes. 
For example, in Ghana, the Mobile T echnology for 
Community Health Initiative provided pregnant women 
with information and reminders through its “Mobile 
Midwife” application. When given the choice between 
receiving information through voice or SMS messages, 
99% chose voice messages (12). It has been noted that this 
likely reflects women’s relatively lower functional literacy, 
even in settings such as Ghana where literacy levels are 
higher than many other sub-Saharan African countries (13). 
Newer data-rich messaging platforms (e.g., WhatsApp and 
T elegram) may obviate the either-or proposition of text 
versus audio by accommodating audio, video, and text in an 
asynchronous conversational flow. 
This context suggests that there are opportunities to 
expand the ways in which digital health technologies are 
used to address maternal health needs, including to identify 
and support women living with chronic pregnancy-related 
morbidity, and stigmatized conditions, such as female 
genital fistula. 
Fistula and barriers to treatment 
Female genital fistula is a severe morbidity that results 
in uncontrollable leakage of urine and/or feces from 
the vagina. It is often obstetric, caused by inadequately 
managed prolonged or obstructed labor. Fistula can also be 
iatrogenic, caused by errors during cesarean section or other 
pelvic surgery procedures. It is estimated that one to two 
million women around the world live with fistula, primarily 
in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (14,15). Most fistulas 
can be repaired through surgery or catheter treatment, but 
many women lack information about and access to fistula 
services (16). Untreated, fistula can become a devastating 
chronic disability, leaving women socially isolated, unable Received: 16 August 2019; Accepted: 18 November 2019; Published: 05 April 2020.
doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
View this article at:  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04mHealth, 2020 Page 3 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
to work, and frequently abandoned by their spouses or 
families (17). Comparing estimates of fistula incidence 
and prevalence to the repair numbers reported to global 
fistula projects and databases suggests that many women 
continue to live with untreated fistula even in countries 
where surgical fistula services have been introduced and 
are supported by governments and external donors (18-20).  
Like many conditions that primarily affect the most 
vulnerable populations, barriers to fistula care are complex. 
However, these barriers have not been well-understood or 
examined at the population level. Additionally, there has 
been very limited evaluation of interventions implemented 
to increase access to fistula care.
Objectives
The USAID supported Fistula Care Plus (FC+) project at 
EngenderHealth and the Population Council collaborated 
on a research-to-action partnership to understand barriers 
to fistula care and identify and evaluate interventions 
to respond to these barriers. The Population Council 
conducted a global literature review as well as formative 
qualitative research to understand specific barriers to 
treatment in Nigeria and Uganda (21-24). Based on 
the findings of this formative research, the FC+ project 
designed and implemented the Fistula T reatment Barriers 
Reduction Intervention in Nigeria and Uganda to improve 
access to fistula information, screening, and treatment. 
Paired with transportation vouchers and support from 
community agents, an interactive voice response (IVR) 
hotline for fistula screening and referral was a key element 
of this intervention. The Population Council is conducting 
an evaluation of the full intervention. The specific aims of 
this paper are: to describe the process of developing an IVR 
hotline for fistula screening and referral, contextualized 
within the broader intervention; to describe the process 
of implementing this intervention, including synthesizing 
stakeholder perspectives and documenting modifications to 
reflect contextual factors; and to report preliminary fistula 
screening and referral service outputs resulting from the 
IVR hotline. 
Methods
Theoretical model of barriers to treatment 
The literature review conducted by the Population Council 
identified a number of barriers faced by women with fistula in acquiring information about and access to fistula 
diagnosis and treatment services. Baker and colleagues 
organized and classified these barriers by adapting the 
three-delays framework frequently used to conceptualize 
factors contributing to maternal morbidity (21).  
The resulting theoretical model recognizes that socio-
economic and cultural factors contribute to delays in 
the decision to seek care; poor accessibility of facilities 
contributes to delays in the decision to seek care as well 
as in identifying and reaching a medical facility; and poor 
quality of care contributes to delays in the decision to 
seek care as well as in receiving adequate and appropriate 
treatment once a facility is reached. This literature review 
also identified 23 articles describing interventions to 
address barriers to fistula care. However, documentation 
and evaluation of these interventions was limited, resulting 
in little ability to draw inferences about their contributions 
to improved treatment access or generalizability to other 
settings (21).
Following the literature review, formative research was 
conducted in Nigeria and Uganda to elucidate specific 
barriers to and enablers of fistula care in these settings  
(22-24). The formative research consisted of in-depth 
interviews with fistula patients, their family members, 
health service providers, and health systems managers; and 
focus group discussions with women who had received 
fistula repair and male and female community stakeholders. 
The formative research data collected was conducted in 
Kano and Ebonyi states in Nigeria, and Hoima and Masaka 
districts in Uganda. 
The literature-based theoretical model and these 
context-specific formative research findings informed the 
development of the Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction 
Intervention. Findings from the formative research have 
been presented extensively elsewhere (22-24). However, 
four notable barriers identified through formative research 
suggested a role for an IVR-based digital health solution 
in improving access to fistula treatment. First, the research 
indicated a persistent impact of stigma. In some settings, 
women with fistula face such shame and isolation due 
to their symptoms that they do not participate in any 
community events. Therefore, in-person community 
education, outreach, and mobilization activities designed to 
share information about fistula and other maternal health 
issues may be failing to reach them (23,24). Second, the 
research suggested that ‘gatekeeping’ by primary health 
center (PHC) providers may create hurdles that prevent 
women from reaching appropriate service points for fistula mHealth, 2020 Page 4 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
diagnosis and treatment (23,24). PHC providers are not 
well-informed about fistula, its symptoms and treatment, or 
the location of fistula centers that are equipped to provide 
diagnostic clinical examinations and surgical or non-
surgical fistula repair. Therefore, women frequently receive 
inaccurate information or even unskilled attempts at fistula 
treatment at PHC sites, rather than being appropriately 
referred onward to fistula centers (23,24). Third, many 
women live at a great distance from these fistula centers—
the financial transportation and opportunity costs of 
reaching these services prevent them from seeking and 
reaching appropriate diagnosis and treatment (22-24). 
Finally, in low-resource settings, many women with fistula 
have low or no literacy; this was observed in our formative 
research settings and has been reported in other studies of 
this population (23-25). Therefore, fistula communication 
messages transmitted through SMS or other written formats 
will be not be effective in reaching them. 
Fistula treatment barriers reduction intervention: role of 
IVR hotline
The Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction Intervention 
sought to address the barriers described above, focusing 
on those that could be addressed effectively in the context 
of a time-bound project and existing local partnerships. 
The intervention design was guided by the Capability, 
Opportunity, and Motivation determines Behavior (COM-B) Model, synthesized from a review of 19 behavior 
change frameworks by Michie and colleagues and applied 
in a variety of health service research settings (26-28). The 
COM-B Model, adapted for the context of fistula care 
seeking, is illustrated in Figure 1 . 
The FC+ intervention was designed to increase women’s 
capability, motivation, and opportunity to decide to seek 
and to access fistula screening and treatment services. T o 
achieve this, the intervention used three communication 
pathways to disseminate fistula information and screening 
resources: trained community agents, trained PHC 
providers, and a free IVR hotline paired with mass media 
messaging. Written job aids were produced for community 
agents and PHC providers to take women through the 
screening algorithm, mirroring the script of the IVR 
hotline. Each pathway provided consistent, accurate 
information on fistula symptoms and treatment, including 
a single, streamlined fistula screening algorithm. Three 
pathways were used because the formative research revealed 
that different barriers may affect different women; the 
presence of multiple, consistent pathways across settings 
was intended to improve information and access for all 
women living with fistula, whatever their specific cluster of 
experienced barriers. 
Positively-screened women were eligible for the 
same enabler through each pathway—a voucher for 
transportation for her and a companion to travel to and 
from an accredited fistula treatment center, where she could Figure 1  The COM-B Model for fistula care seeking. COM-B, Capability, Opportunity, and Motivation determines Behavior.Capability: 
Are women able to seek fistula repairs? 
Do they have social and environmental resources?
How isolated and stigmatized do they feel?
Motivation: 
Are women reflecting on their needs and resources?
Do they consider technological, social and financial support?
Can women overcome stigma barriers?
Opportunity:
Informational and instrumental support in community: 
technology, mass media, educators, peers
Informational and instrumental support from health systems: 
primary health care providers, referral, financial, and 
transportation supportBehavior: 
Decisions to seek fistula care
Reaching fistula repair centersmHealth, 2020 Page 5 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
receive clinical diagnosis and treatment, as appropriate. The 
full intervention has been described elsewhere (29) and the 
description here focuses on the IVR hotline. 
FC+ collaborated with Viamo (formed in 2017 from 
a merger of VOTO Mobile and Human Network 
International), a company that uses a digital-over-mobile 
platform for data collection and the provision of public 
service information to consumers via SMS and IVR. The 
FC+ hotline used pre-recorded messages by voice actors 
to take callers through a process of screening for fistula 
symptoms, collection of background information, and 
provision of action messages depending on the screening 
result. At the start of the call, women were able to select 
their preferred language. Callers were asked their age, 
followed by a key fistula screening symptom question: “ Do 
you currently experience constant leakage of urine or feces from 
your vagina during the day and night even when you are not 
urinating or trying to urinate? ” Callers who responded “yes” 
were asked questions about their demographic background, 
perceived cause of fistula, and barriers they have experienced 
in seeking treatment. Women who were positively screened 
and lived within the intervention areas were told that they 
would receive follow up from a community agent within four days. Women who were positively screened but lived 
outside the intervention area received follow-up messages, 
both voice and SMS, with information about the nearest 
fistula treatment center. In order to reduce cost-related 
barriers to care, the hotline was designed so that callers 
“flash” into a toll-free number and receive a prompt call 
back.
A prototype version of the IVR hotline was tested for 
issues including clarity of terms and acceptability of voices, 
and the script and audio recordings were revised to reflect 
user feedback. In addition to mass media advertisements, 
the fistula hotline was widely advertised through graphic, 
low-text flyers disseminated by community agents and PHC 
providers at community venues (see Figure 2 ). 
Figure 3  illustrates the role of the IVR hotline in the 
fistula screening and referral process, in both Uganda and 
Nigeria. 
Setting 
FC+ implemented the Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction 
intervention in Nigeria and Uganda, both of which have 
a well-documented fistula burden. According to the Figure 2 Communication materials advertising the IVR hotline in Nigeria and Uganda in the Hausa, Igbo, Nigerian Pidgin, and Luganda 
languages. IVR, interactive voice response.
mHealth, 2020 Page 6 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
Demographic and Health Surveys, 0.4% of women of 
reproductive age in Nigeria report ever experiencing fistula 
symptoms and 1.6% of women in Uganda report lifetime 
experience of such symptoms (30,31). Applying correction 
factors, Maheu-Giroux and colleagues have estimated that 
this translates to 46,800 women currently living with fistula 
in Nigeria and 74,200 in Uganda (32). Both countries 
have implemented national and local efforts to establish 
fistula treatment centers, including in collaboration with 
international partners. 
The FC+ project implemented the Fistula T reatment 
Barriers Reduction Intervention in in two areas within 
Nigeria: Ikwo local governance area (LGA) in Ebonyi state, 
and Katsina LGA in Katsina state; and one area within 
Uganda: Kalungu district. An accredited fistula treatment 
center served as the key service delivery point for each 
intervention area, to which all positively-screened women 
were referred through the intervention. In Nigeria, women 
were referred to the National Obstetric Fistula Center 
(NOFIC), Abakaliki, in Ebonyi and the NOFIC, Babbar 
Ruga, in Katsina. In Uganda, women from Kalungu district were referred to the Fistula Clinic at Kitovu Mission 
Hospital in Masaka district. 
In Nigeria, community agents participating in 
the intervention worked for two community-based 
organizations, Daughters of Virtue and Empowerment 
(DOVENET) in Ebonyi and the Federation of Muslim 
Women in Nigeria (FOWAM) in Katsina. In Uganda, 
community agents were members of Village Health T eams 
(VHT s), which are groups of community health worker 
volunteers formally affiliated with the Ministry of Health.
T o reflect languages spoken in these settings, the IVR 
hotline’s pre-recorded audio was available in four languages: 
Hausa, Igbo, and Nigerian Pidgin in Nigeria; and Luganda 
in Uganda. 
While the intention was to restrict all three interventions 
screening and referral pathways to the intervention areas, 
in Nigeria this proved challenging for the IVR hotline. 
Because the mass media advertisement of the hotline had 
to be delivered through state radio, it was not possible to 
prevent callers from outside the intervention area from 
receiving this information and calling the hotline. As Figure 3 Role of IVR hotline in fistula screening and referral in Nigeria and Uganda. IEC, information, education and communication; 
IVR, interactive voice response. 
Community LevelMass media /  IEC Materials
Fistula screening hotline aired 
via radio in Ebonyi and Katsina. 
Postcard advertising Fistula hotline 
widely distributed to community 
members by community agents 
(DOVENET/FOMWN) and at 
PHCs and other relevant venues 
(churches, LGA secretariat, shops, 
etc.).
Mass media / IEC Materials
Fistula screening hotline aired 
via radio in Kalungu. Postcard 
advertising Fistula hotline widely 
distributed to community members 
by VHT reps and at PHCs and 
other relevant venues.Community agents
Identify women for fistula 
screening and inform them of 
Fistula Hotline and transportation 
voucher mechanism.
VHT representatives
Identify women for fistula screening 
and inform them of Fistula Hotline 
and transportation voucher 
mechanism.Role of IVR hotline - Nigeria
Role of IVR hotline - UgandaClinical Examination and 
Treatment
Women are examined by 
treatment facility provider. 
Diagnosed and eligible 
women receive treatment.
Clinical Examination and 
Treatment
Women are examined by 
treatment facility provider. 
Women with diagnosed 
fistulas added to patient list 
for upcoming camp.Fistula 
Screening 
Hotline
Women call 
hotline and are 
screened using 
algorithm via 
VOTO Mobile’s 
Interactive 
Voice 
Recording 
(IVR).
Fistula 
Screening 
Hotline
Women call 
hotline and are 
screened using 
algorithm via 
VOTO Mobile’s 
Interactive 
Voice 
Recording 
(IVR).Transportation Voucher 
Mechanism
Community agent (DOVENET/
FOMWAN) follows up with 
suspected women within 2 
days of IVR call or immediately 
following in-person screening. 
Community agent calls sensitized 
driver (NURTW) to arrange pick 
up for women with suspected 
fistulas (and companion) to travel 
to treatment facility for diagnosis. 
Community agents provide 
women with dignity kits for ride 
and a voucher for transportation 
(round-trip with companion). 
Drivers (NURTW) will consolidate 
their vouchers on a monthly basis 
and submit for reimbursement at 
NURTW headquarters.
Transportation Voucher 
Mechanism
VHT rep follows up with 
suspected women within 2 
days of IVR call or immediately 
following in-person screening. 
VHT rep calls sensitized driver 
to arrange pick up for women 
with suspected fistulas (and 
companion) to travel to treatment 
facility for diagnosis. VHT reps 
provide women with dignity 
kits for rides. Upon arrival at 
treatment site, driver is provided 
mobile money code for travel 
reimbursement.mHealth, 2020 Page 7 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
a result, hotline usage in Nigeria includes callers from 
Ebonyi and Katsina States as a whole, rather than only the 
intervention areas. 
The intervention was implemented from June 2017 to 
April 2018 in Ebonyi, July 2017 to April 2018 in Katsina, 
and July 2017 to June 2018 in Kalungu. 
Data collection
T able 1  summarizes data collection for the evaluation of the 
overall Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction Intervention. 
Process and output data to evaluate the comprehensive 
intervention were gathered through multiple qualitative 
and quantitative sources, including PHC assessments; 
fistula center record reviews; surveys of PHC providers and 
women who had received fistula repairs; and interviews and 
focus group discussions with stakeholders, including health 
providers, fistula clients, community agents, transportation 
partners, and health system managers. Quantitative data 
collection documented health facility capacity, provider 
and stakeholder knowledge and practices, and service usage 
and outputs at health facilities as well as through the three 
intervention pathways. Qualitative data collection explored 
stakeholders’ experiences of the implementation process, 
including ways in which the intervention was modified 
over the course of the implementation period to respond to 
contextual realities. Qualitative data collection also examined fistula clients’ and community members’ perspectives on 
barriers and enablers to accessing fistula care and normative 
attitudes toward fistula causes and consequences.
Baseline evaluation data were collected in all three 
sites shortly before the intervention was initiated; midline 
assessments were conducted between four and five months 
into intervention implementation; and endline evaluation 
data were collected in each site after the implementation 
period was complete. Feedback meetings to disseminate 
learnings from the intervention were conducted in all 
three sites, and used as additional opportunities to collect 
stakeholder perspectives. 
Monitoring data, including monthly services statistics 
at fistula treatment centers, were compiled on an ongoing 
basis by intervention staff. A facility monitoring tool was 
provided to intervention area fistula treatment centers to 
enable ongoing documentation of fistula clients’ exposure 
to the IVR hotline and other intervention pathways, as 
well as experienced barriers to fistula care. Monitoring data 
collection unique to the IVR hotline included ongoing 
review of call logs and meta-data from the Viamo platform. 
For this specific study of the IVR hotline, quantitative 
summaries of hotline use and referral outputs were 
produced across all three intervention areas. Qualitative 
data were analyzed by a team that jointly developed a 
codebook of emergent themes based on in-depth reading 
of the transcripts. Researchers used NVivo 11 software Table 1 Data collection to evaluate the fistula treatment barriers reduction intervention
Data source Baseline†Midline Endline 
Nigeria Uganda Nigeria Uganda Nigeria Uganda
Ebonyi KatsinaCentral 1 
Sub-RegionEbonyi KatsinaCentral 1 
Sub-RegionEbonyi KatsinaCentral 1 
Sub-Region
Facility assessments of PHCs 39 37 50 N/A N/A N/A 38 31 43
Fistula Center Assessment 1 1 1 N/A N/A N/A 1 1 1
Surveys of PHC providers 117 88 119 N/A N/A N/A 100 93 100
Surveys of post-repair women 91 81 96 N/A N/A N/A 51 44 47
In-depth Interviews with critical stakeholders: 
beneficiaries and implementers 30* 30* 29* 19 18 18 11 19 18
Focus group discussions with men and women 
residing in selected communities0 4 6 N/A N/A N/A 8 8 8
Program/intervention monitoring statistics N/A Intervention implementation period only
Dissemination and feedback meetings N/A 3 3
†, baseline, midline, and endline refer to the overall period during which the intervention was implemented (June 2017 to June 2018, with 
variation between sites, as noted in the description of methods). PHC, primary health center.mHealth, 2020 Page 8 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
to organize and code transcripts, from which charts and 
narrative summaries were generated. This manuscript draws 
on narrative summaries and quotations from interviews 
related to implementation and experience of the IVR 
hotline. 
Ethical considerations
In the United States, the research protocol for the 
evaluation of the Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction 
intervention was reviewed and approved by the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) at the Population Council in New 
York. In Nigeria, the protocol was also reviewed by the 
National Health Research Ethics Committee at the Federal 
Ministry of Health (FMOH) and the Ebonyi and Kano 
State Health Research Ethics Committees. In Uganda, the 
protocol was reviewed by the School of Medicine Research 
and Ethics Committee at Makerere University and the 
Uganda National Council for Science and T echnology. 
Results
Service outputs
T able 2  provides outputs related to IVR hotline 
implementation in 2017 and 2018, synthesized from 
ongoing monitoring of the Viamo platform and facility 
monitoring tools. Between June 2017 and April 2018, 301 
unique callers contacted the IVR hotline and completed 
the key screening questions in Ebonyi. Of these, 228 (76%) 
were screened positively based on their response to the 
primary fistula symptoms question. Between July 2017 and 
April 2018, 144 unique callers were screened via IVR in 
Katsina, with 101 (70%) screening positive. Between July 
2017 and June 2018 in Kalungu. One hundred and twenty-
one unique callers were screened via IVR in Kalungu, with 86 (71%) screening positive. In Nigeria, 118 women 
in Ebonyi and 99 women in Katsina referred through 
the intervention received diagnosis services at the fistula 
treatment center; and in Uganda, 41 referred women from 
Kalungu received diagnosis services. 
Figure 4  illustrates quarterly hotline usage in the two 
sites in Nigeria during the quarters when the hotline was 
active in both Katsina and Ebonyi. This demonstrates that 
calls to the hotline peaked in the second and third quarters 
of hotline availability. This increase was driven primarily by 
increased calls in Katsina in these quarters. 
 
Intervention modifications during implementation 
Data from ongoing monitoring as well as qualitative data 
collection at midline and endline revealed the ways in which 
the Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction Intervention 
was modified from the initial program plan during 
implementation. The amendments reflected responses to 
challenges identified by implementation stakeholders. 
A number of modifications addressed the function of the 
IVR hotline. Early in the implementation period, it became 
evident that many community agents themselves had low 
or no literacy and were themselves using the IVR hotline 
to screen and refer women. The training and guidance for 
intervention partners were revised to explicitly incorporate 
the hotline and describe a process for IVR-facilitated 
screening by community agents. Poor cellular connectivity 
created challenges in the efficient use of the hotline and 
required partners to adapt their approaches. For example, in 
one Uganda locality, connectivity was stronger at night, so 
VHT representatives shifted to calling the fistula program 
coordinator later at night. Community agents also identified 
hot spots for cellular connectivity in their villages and 
disseminated information about these among their peers, to Table 2  IVR fistula hotline usage 2017–2018
Output Ebonyi Katsina Kalungu
Number of unique callers completing IVR hotline screening†301 144 121
Number (percent) of callers screened positively for fistula 228 (76%) 101 (70%) 86 (71%)
Number of positive-screened women referred to and receiving 
diagnosis at facility118 (18 Ikwo LGA) 99 (9 Katsina LGA) 41
†, this includes callers who responded to the primary fistula symptom screening question and were not calling from a phone number that 
had already called the hotline within a short time frame. This figure excludes callers from outside Kalungu district in Uganda. It includes 
callers from within Ebonyi state and Katsina state but outside the Ikwo and Katsina LGAs. See the Methods section for the rationale for 
including callers from outside the intervention areas in Nigeria. IVR, interactive voice response; LGA, local governance area.mHealth, 2020 Page 9 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
improve their ability to follow-up with positively-screened 
women.
Women’s limited ownership of phones and the frequent 
use of a single phone by many individuals threatened 
confidentiality during the follow-up call process. T o respond 
to this, the program developed a protocol for community 
agent call-backs to promote confidentiality and ensure that 
screening results were only discussed with the woman who 
had called the hotline, and not friends or other household 
members. 
Community partners also felt that, despite mass media 
advertisement and communication materials, awareness 
of the IVR hotline was inadequate. Larger-format posters 
were produced and displayed at PHC facilities as well 
as distributed through community agents, to improve 
knowledge about the hotline. Providing refresher training 
and ensuring adequate monitoring of hotline calls and 
coordination among the community agents providing 
referral and transportation support were perceived as 
necessary to effective functioning of the IVR hotline by the 
implementation partners. 
Documentation of the implementation process also 
revealed variations in implementation due to site-specific 
needs and preferences. In Ebonyi, language comprehension 
posed a challenge despite pre-testing of messages, 
necessitating adequate retranslation of the IVR platform. 
In Katsina and Kalungu, comparison of facility records 
with intervention monitoring data indicated that some 
women preferred to travel to the fistula treatment center 
independently, without using the transportation voucher. 
Additionally in Kalungu, intervention staff reported preferring to take women who were screened positively 
through the hotline to a PHC center for an initial follow-
up, before traveling to the fistula treatment center. This 
may have resulted in some women being diagnosed with 
other non-fistula conditions at the PHC level, thereby 
further reducing the proportion of positively-screened 
women who used the transport voucher or arrived at the 
fistula treatment facility in Uganda.
Stakeholder perspectives
During midline and endline interviews and focus group 
discussions (33-35), most stakeholders reported that the 
IVR hotline was a helpful tool in broadly disseminating 
fistula treatment information. Community agents found the 
hotline to be helpful in organizing their fistula screening 
and referral process. 
“With that hotline, they give you directions properly and you 
don’t lose track. It helps women because it gives them directives… 
there is a health worker who responds to you and tells you to go to 
Kitovu like this and that.” —Community agent, Uganda
Respondents noted that the hotline helped reduce 
stigma associated with disclosing fistula symptoms, with 
some community agents attributing client volume at fistula 
treatment centers to the hotline. 
“Because of stigma, the person thinks, ‘it’s just me and the 
radio gives the number’ – (she) calls the number… it was a 
wonderful strategy and really helped .”—Health program 
manager, Ebonyi, Nigeria
“I would tell them that if they hear of anyone with the 
problem, utilize that number…(if she) does not want to tell you Figure 4  Quarterly hotline usage and positive screening. 
Nigeria IVR hotline: number of callers and number positively screened 
July 2017-March 2018
Q2                            Q3                             Q4                             Q1
Quarter
Ebonyi # of hotline calls Ebonyi # screened positive Katsina # of hotline calls Katsina # screened positiveNumber120
100
80
60
40
20
0mHealth, 2020 Page 10 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
her secret, she can dial it privately .”—Community agent, 
Uganda
“When you have the number, you will not even see the 
women… for instance, in a month you will not have (referred) 
anybody that has the problem, but they will be plenty in the 
hospital due to the hotline number. They will just go directly .”—
Community agent, Katsina, Nigeria
Across sites, the complementarity of community agents 
and the hotline was critical for effective referral and 
transport to the fistula center. Respondents reported that, to 
be effective, the hotline requires enough publicity through 
radio, peer or PHC promotion.
“There is a VHT who came and told me, ‘there are some flyers 
which have some numbers which you can come and get and try 
to call them.’ I went and she gave me that number and I called 
them .”—Fistula client, Uganda 
“At times even if it’s not the number, they listen to the 
announcements over the radio and they come asking me about 
it that, ‘We heard an announcement over the radio, is it true?’ 
Then I tell them that is true, that is how it is, and tell them to go 
there .”—Community agent, Uganda
Respondents identified challenges in using the IVR 
hotline as intended. In Uganda, community agents faced 
difficulty in linking with hotline callers for follow up and 
community skepticism about the confidentiality afforded 
by community-agent-initiated calls. Across sites, some 
respondents were confused about how to use the hotline 
and reported challenges related to poor network coverage 
and connectivity in the intervention areas. 
“The network in our villages is a problem, so one might call 
the hotline and the network fails which becomes a problem… 
one patient has been calling now for a week; the number is not 
available .”—Driver, Uganda 
“Using the hotline is (difficult); not everybody has a phone and 
not everybody knows how to operate a phone except by using the 
community volunteer ”—Community agent, Katsina, Nigeria
Additionally, some women who successfully used the 
hotline for screening and accessed fistula treatment facilities 
complained about speaking to a recording, rather than a 
real person. 
“I was about to lose hope. I wondered why we cannot get to 
people and instead only the computer voices. ”—Fistula client, 
Uganda
During endline dissemination meetings to share learning 
and solicit feedback from the Fistula T reatment Barriers 
Reduction Intervention, local and national stakeholders 
reflected on the hotline. They expressed enthusiasm for 
wider community education about fistula, to shift potentially stigmatizing norms and empower women with fistula to 
seek care. In Katsina, media outlets interested in corporate 
social responsibility considered sustaining fistula awareness 
campaigns to relay care options through television and 
radio. In Ebonyi, stakeholders advocated for the placement 
of a desk officer at the local government level to connect 
women to fistula treatment facilities. In Uganda, mechanisms 
for building awareness were prioritized in discussions of 
the National Fistula Strategy. Despite the wide reach and 
promise of the hotline across sites, there was a collective 
recognition of the need for national support and financial 
commitment to sustain such mechanisms, particularly 
through integration with routine referral systems.
Discussion 
The IVR hotline was widely used in intervention areas 
in Nigeria and Uganda to identify and refer women with 
fistula symptoms, both by women themselves and through 
facilitated calls with community agents. 
Strengths
This paper describes a novel application of a client-facing 
IVR platform to support fistula screening and referral, and 
indicates its utility in increasing awareness and use of fistula 
services by women in Nigeria and Uganda. Documentation 
of the implementation experience through qualitative and 
quantitative data from multiple sources enabled an in-depth 
examination of how digital health technologies can be used 
for client-directed screening and referral in settings of 
limited health service access, and how IVR tools can address 
barriers inherent in text-based digital health technologies. 
Limitations 
The hotline was implemented as a pilot for up to one year, 
depending on the site, in relatively limited geographic 
areas. At this time, there is not funding to continue the 
hotline through local resources and the hotline is not 
currently active. This precluded a robust assessment of 
sustainability. Future work could consider strategies to 
strengthen sustainability including disseminating the 
content through a commercial digital health platform or 
recruiting local partners to take on hotline maintenance and 
conduct consistent follow-up for positively-screened women 
(36,37). Additionally, during this study, it was not possible 
to assess population exposure to mass media and other mHealth, 2020 Page 11 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
advertisement of the hotline, to gauge the potential for 
expanded impact with additional saturation of population 
awareness of the hotline. Community partners’ feedback 
during implementation indicated limited awareness of the 
hotline, suggesting that the ability of the intervention to 
reach those women most isolated due to stigma could be 
improved. In Uganda, recent research indicates that about 
58.5% of women listen to a radio at least once a week; given 
this usage rate, mass media advertisements may have to be 
quite frequent to achieve greater awareness of digital health 
interventions such as the hotline (31). 
Potential population impact 
Applying the service outputs documented through this 
preliminary analysis, it is possible to estimate the impact of 
this screening and referral intervention on the population-
level fistula burden. 
Not all women who are positively screened will be 
positively diagnosed with fistula upon clinical examination. 
Monitoring data does not allow us to determine which of 
the positively screened women were confirmed to have 
fistula upon diagnostic examination at the fistula treatment 
center. However, a study in Nigeria pairing a similar 
symptom-based fistula screening question with clinical 
diagnostic examination of positively-screened women 
found the screening to have a 47% positive predictive value 
(PPV) (38). Applying this PPV to the number of positively 
screened callers, it can be estimated that approximately 
107 fistula cases were identified in Ebonyi, 47 in Katsina, 
and 40 in Kalungu District. It is likely that most positively-
screened women who do not have fistula do have severe 
incontinence from other causes, which can also potentially 
be diagnosed and addressed once they are seen at a fistula 
treatment center.
These figures can be compared to estimates of fistula 
prevalence in Uganda and Nigeria in order to provide 
a preliminary assessment of the proportion of women 
living with fistula identified through the IVR hotline. As 
noted above, researchers have applied correction factors 
to Demographic and Health Survey data on self-reported 
lifetime experience of fistula symptoms to estimate current 
fistula prevalence in sub-Saharan African countries (32). 
They estimated that 46,800 women are living with fistula 
in Nigeria, and 74,200 in Uganda. Fistula is not evenly 
distributed within countries—factors such as population 
density, access to emergency obstetric care, and fertility rates 
can affect fistula prevalence in specific regions and states. However, assuming proportional geographic distribution 
of fistula and applying the most recent available population 
figures (39-41), it can be estimated that 696 women are 
living with fistula in Ebonyi state (69 in the Ikwo LGA) 
1,895 women in Katsina state (104 in Katsina LGA), and 
758 women in Kalungu district. Based on these assumptions, 
approximately 15.4% of fistula cases in Ebonyi State, 2.5% in 
Katsina State, and 5.3% in Kalungu District were screened 
through a nine to twelve-month implementation of the 
IVR hotline. The Ebonyi and Katsina proportions are more 
conservative as they reflect the populations of the states 
rather than the intervention areas.
Program and research implications
The use of a client-facing IVR interface integrated with 
complementary health systems and community support 
appears promising to improve access to care for women 
living with fistula, particularly those who face care-seeking 
barriers such as stigma, low literacy, and social or geographic 
isolation. The hotline may also help women avoid delays 
in care seeking due to inadequate capacity at PHC sites, 
as it appears user-friendly and effective in reaching large 
populations, if accompanied by adequate publicity to 
community health partners. While the estimated proportion 
of fistula cases identified through hotline screening is 
relatively low (2.5–15.4%), this may reflect the limited 
geography and short duration of implementation within the 
study context. The impact may be significantly greater if the 
IVR screening approach can be implemented for a longer 
period of time, advertised more broadly, and integrated with 
other population-oriented digital health platforms, whether 
these are managed by national health systems or through 
commercial business models. 
User feedback and stakeholder perspectives indicate 
challenges in efficient and effective hotline use. Language 
comprehension requires careful consideration and may 
pose challenges to scale up in linguistically diverse settings. 
Variable mobile connectivity also currents limits scale up 
in the very areas where poor access to care increases fistula 
risk.
Notably, while the intervention sought to address 
barriers that are magnified by gender inequity (e.g., 
women’s limited control of financial resources, relatively 
lower literacy, and vulnerability to provider gatekeeping), 
the implementation process uncovered efficiency and 
effectiveness challenges driven by the same gender issues. 
For instance, our experience concurred with other research mHealth, 2020 Page 12 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
in Uganda and Nigeria, as well as sub-Saharan Africa more 
broadly, indicating that women are less likely to own their 
own phones and more likely to share a single phone with 
multiple other family members (31,42,43). This presented 
challenges to confidentiality, made the process of follow-up 
for referral more cumbersome, and may have reduced some 
women’s willingness to make use of transportation vouchers. 
Crucially, the necessity of in-person contacts for referral 
follow-up and transportation support suggest that a digital 
health intervention alone may not yield sufficient impact 
in addressing barriers to fistula treatment in low-resource 
settings. This may change as phone ownership expands and 
tools, such as mobile money, are more widely accessible and 
used in lower-resource settings.
While most examinations of digital health solutions for 
maternal health have focused on text-based applications, 
our experience aligns with certain lessons identified in 
these reviews. Ahmed and colleagues identified success 
factors, including technology (e.g., network coverage, 
technical support), factors promoting user acceptance, 
funding, organization factors (e.g., effective coordination), 
and political support (e.g., government support to scale 
technologies) (44). Consideration of such factors and 
learning from this implementation experience provide 
guidance for how IVR-based screening and referral for 
fistula and other similarly challenging health conditions 
can be refined and expanded in future iterations. Should 
this IVR intervention be delivered at an expanded scale, 
it will be important to monitor population exposure and 
the process of implementation, to identify, as Lefevre 
and colleagues have emphasized, who the intervention is 
reaching, what dosage the intended target population is 
receiving, and where “critical breaks” in the delivery of the 
intervention and follow-up services occur (45). 
The monitoring and evaluation of this implementation 
experience has appropriately provided information relevant 
at the early stages of a digital health intervention (46), such 
as functionality, usability, efficacy, and feasibility. Future 
research on the role of the IVR hotline in addressing 
barriers to fistula treatment can examine more complex, 
population-oriented results, including quality and cost-
effectiveness. 
It is important to note that the IVR intervention was 
nested within a comprehensive intervention providing other 
pathways for fistula screening and referral. This paper only 
presents preliminary results from analysis of quantitative 
and qualitative data collected at the endpoint of the overall 
intervention. The final evaluation of the Fistula T reatment Barriers Reduction Intervention’s effects is currently being 
completed by the Population Council. Findings regarding 
the total influence of the Fistula T reatment Barriers 
Reduction intervention on fistula case detection, barriers 
to, and completion of treatment will be reported separately 
when this evaluation is complete.
Conclusions 
This experience implementing the fistula screening hotline 
suggests that IVR-based interventions may be particularly 
useful in settings where literacy is limited to scale access to 
health services for stigmatized conditions. However, such 
interventions ought to be linked to complementary referral 
and support systems to optimize impacts for community 
members. Further program experience and research is 
required to understand the options for integrating the IVR 
hotline, or similar interventions using mobile technologies, 
for screening and referral into broader digital health 
platforms that are sustained by national health systems. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors thank Erin Mielke and Mary Ellen Stanton of 
the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID) for the review of this manuscript. They also thank 
Charity Ndwiga of Population Council-Kenya for her 
support in qualitative data collection and interpretation. 
This study is made possible by the support of the American 
People through USAID. 
Funding: None.
Footnote
Conflicts of Interest:  The authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.
Ethical Statement:  The authors are accountable for all 
aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related 
to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are 
appropriately investigated and resolved. In the United 
States, the research protocol for the evaluation of the Fistula 
T reatment Barriers Reduction intervention was reviewed 
and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the 
Population Council in New York. In Nigeria, the protocol 
was also reviewed by the National Health Research Ethics 
Committee at the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) 
and the Ebonyi and Kano State Health Research Ethics mHealth, 2020 Page 13 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
Committees. In Uganda, the protocol was reviewed by the 
School of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee at 
Makerere University and the Uganda National Council for 
Science and T echnology. 
Open Access Statement: This is an Open Access article 
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International 
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the non-
commercial replication and distribution of the article with 
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and 
the original work is properly cited (including links to both 
the formal publication through the relevant DOI and the 
license). See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
nd/4.0/ .
References
1. T ran Ngoc C, Bigirimana N, Muneene D, et al. 
Conclusions of the digital health hub of the T ransform 
Africa Summit (2018): strong government leadership 
and public-private-partnerships are key prerequisites for 
sustainable scale up of digital health in Africa. BMC Proc 
2018;12:17. 
2. United Nations. Resolution A/RES/70/1. T ransforming 
our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. 
In: Seventieth United Nations General Assembly, New 
York, 25 September 2015.  
3. WHO guideline: recommendations on digital 
interventions for health system strengthening. World 
Health Organization, Geneva, 2019.  
4. Chen H, Chai Y, Dong L, et al. Effectiveness and 
Appropriateness of mHealth Interventions for Maternal 
and Child Health: Systematic Review. JMIR Mhealth 
Uhealth 2018;6:e7. 
5. Feroz A, Perveen S, Aftab W. Role of mHealth 
applications for improving antenatal and postnatal care 
in low and middle income countries: a systematic review. 
BMC Health Serv Res 2017;17:704. 
6. Lee SH, Nurmatov UB, Nwaru BI, et al. Effectiveness of 
mHealth interventions for maternal, newborn and child 
health in low- and middle-income countries: Systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Glob Health 2016;6:010401. 
7. Colaci D, Chaudhri S, Vasan A. mHealth Interventions 
in Low-Income Countries to Address Maternal Health: A 
Systematic Review. Ann Glob Health 2016;82:922-35. 
8. Watterson JL, Walsh J, Madeka I. Using mHealth to 
Improve Usage of Antenatal Care, Postnatal Care, and Immunization: A Systematic Review of the Literature. 
Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:153402. 
9. Sondaal SF , Browne JL, Amoakoh-Coleman M, et 
al. Assessing the Effect of mHealth Interventions in 
Improving Maternal and Neonatal Care in Low- and 
Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review. PLoS 
One 2016;11:e0154664. 
10. Labrique AB, Vasudevan L, Kochi E, et al. mHealth 
innovations as health system strengthening tools: 12 
common applications and a visual framework. Glob Health 
Sci Pract 2013;1:160-71. 
11. Krause HG, Natukunda H, Singasi I, et al. T reatment-
seeking behaviour and social status of women with 
pelvic organ prolapse, 4th degree obstetric tears, and 
obstetric fistula in western Uganda. Int Urogynecol J 
2014;25:1555-9. 
12. Crawford J, Larsen-Cooper E, Jezman Z, et al. SMS 
versus voice messaging to deliver MNCH communication 
in rural Malawi: assessment of delivery success and user 
experience. Glob Health Sci Pract 2014;2:35-46. 
13. Bell O. The blind spot of SMS projects: Constituent 
illiteracy. Available online: https://www.ictworks.org/the-
blind-spot-of-sms-projects-constituient-illiteracy/
14. Dolea C, AbouZahr C. Global Burden of Obstructed 
Labour in the Year 2000. World Health Organization, 
Geneva, 2003. 
15. Adler AJ, Ronsmans C, Calvert C, et al. Estimating the 
prevalence of obstetric fistula: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2013;13:246. 
16. Lyimo MA, Mosha IH. Reasons for delay in seeking 
treatment among women with obstetric fistula in T anzania: 
a qualitative study. BMC Womens Health 2019;19:93. 
17. Mselle L T, Moland KM, Evjen-Olsen B, et al. "I am 
nothing": experiences of loss among women suffering from 
severe birth injuries in T anzania. BMC Womens Health 
2011;11:49. 
18. Direct Relief International. Global Fistula Map. Available 
online: https://www.globalfistulamap.org/
19. Fistula Care Plus. Annual Reports. Available online: 
https://fistulacare.org/resources/program-reports/
20. Sripad P , Johnson C, T ripathi V , et al. Comparing three 
models of fistula care among five facilities in Nigeria and 
Uganda. In: Drew LB, Ruder B, Schwartz DA, editors. A 
Multidisciplinary Approach to Obstetric Fistula in Africa – 
Public Health, Anthropological and Medical Perspectives. 
Springer Publishing, New York, In press. 
21. Baker Z, Bellows B, Bach R, et al. Barriers to obstetric 
fistula treatment in low-income countries: a systematic mHealth, 2020 Page 14 of 14
© mHealth. All rights reserved. mHealth 2020;6:12 | http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
review. T rop Med Int Health 2017;22:938-59. 
22. Keya KT, Sripad P , Nwala E, et al. "Poverty is the big 
thing": exploring financial, transportation, and opportunity 
costs associated with fistula management and repair in 
Nigeria and Uganda. Int J Equity Health 2018;17:70. 
23. Warren C, Agbonkhese R, Ishaku S. Formative Research on 
Factors Influencing Access to Fistula Care and T reatment in 
Uganda. Population Council, New York, 2016. 
24. Sripad P , Warren C. Formative Research on Factors 
Influencing Access to Fistula Care and T reatment in 
Uganda. Population Council, New York, 2016. 
25. Khisa W, Wakasiaka S, Kagema F , et al. Contraception 
knowledge and practice among fistula patients at referral 
centers in Kenya. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2012;118:220-2. 
26. Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change 
wheel: a new method for characterising and designing 
behaviour change interventions. Implement Sci 2011;6:42. 
27. Ayakaka I, Ackerman S, Ggita JM, et al. Identifying 
barriers to and facilitators of tuberculosis contact 
investigation in Kampala, Uganda: a behavioral approach. 
Implement Sci 2017;12:33. 
28. Ayton DR, Barker AL, Morello RT, et al. Barriers and 
enablers to the implementation of the 6-PACK falls 
prevention program: A pre-implementation study in 
hospitals participating in a cluster randomised controlled 
trial. PLoS One 2017;12:e0171932. 
29. T ripathi V , Arnoff E, Sripad P . Removing barriers to fistula 
care: Applying appreciative inquiry to improve access to 
screening and treatment in Nigeria and Uganda. Health 
Care Women Int 2019:1-16. [Epub ahead of print].
30. Mallick, L. Comparative Analysis of a Proxy Measurement 
of Vaginal Fistula: Supplement to DHS Analytical Studies 
No. 17. ICF International, Rockville, 2016. 
31. Uganda Bureau of Statistcs (UBOS) and ICF . Uganda 
Demographic and Health Survey 2016: Key Indicators 
Report. UBOS, Kampala, 2017. 
32. Maheu-Giroux M, Filippi V , Samadoulougou S, et 
al. Prevalence of symptoms of vaginal fistula in 19 
sub-Saharan Africa countries: a meta-analysis of 
national household survey data. Lancet Glob Health 
2015;3:e271-8. 
33. Sripad P , Nwala E, T ripathi V . Reducing barriers to 
accessing fistula repair: Implementation research in 
Ebonyi. Population Council, New York, 2018. 
34. Sripad P , Nwala E, T ripathi V . Reducing barriers to 
accessing fistula repair: Implementation research in 
Katsina. Population Council, New York, 2018.35. Barageine J, Ndwiga C, Kanakulya H, et al. Reducing 
barriers to accessing fistula repair: Implementation 
research in Uganda. Population Council, New York, 2018. 
36. Blanc AK, Glazer K, Ofomata-Aderemi U, et al. Myths 
and Misinformation: An Analysis of T ext Messages Sent 
to a Sexual and Reproductive Health Q&A Service in 
Nigeria. Stud Fam Plann 2016;47:39-53. 
37. Green EP , Whitcomb A, Kahumbura C, et al. "What is 
the best method of family planning for me?": a text mining 
analysis of messages between users and agents of a digital 
health service in Kenya. Gates Open Res 2019;3:1475. 
38. T unçalp Ö, Isah A, Landry E, et al. Community-based 
screening for obstetric fistula in Nigeria: a novel approach. 
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2014;14:44. 
39. National Bureau of Statistics. 2017 Demographics 
Statistics Bulletin. NBOS, Abuja, 2018. 
40. City Population. Nigeria: Administrative Divisions. 
Available online: https://www.citypopulation.de/php/
nigeria-admin.php
41. Uganda Bureau of Statistics. The National Population 
and Housing Census 2014 – Area Specific Profile Series, 
Kampala, Uganda. UBOS, Kampala, 2017. 
42. Forenbacher I, Husnjak S, Cviti ć I, et al. Determinants of 
mobile phone ownership in Nigeria. T elecommunications 
Policy 2019;43:101812.
43. Burjorjee DM, Bin-Humam Y. New insights on women’s 
mobile phone ownership. Consultative Group to Assist the 
Poor, Washington, 2018. 
44. Ag Ahmed MA, Gagnon MP , Hamelin-Brabant L, et al. 
A mixed methods systematic review of success factors of 
mhealth and telehealth for maternal health in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Mhealth 2017;3:22. 
45. LeFevre AE, Dane P , Copley CJ, et al. Unpacking the 
performance of a mobile health information messaging 
program for mothers (MomConnect) in South Africa: 
evidence on program reach and messaging exposure. BMJ 
Glob Health 2018;3:e000583. 
46. Labrique A, Vasudevan L, Weiss W, et al. Establishing 
Standards to Evaluate the Impact of Integrating Digital 
Health into Health Systems. Glob Health Sci Pract 
2018;6:S5-17. 
doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2019.12.04
Cite this article as:  T ripathi V , Arnoff E, Bellows B, Sripad P . 
Use of interactive voice response technology to address barriers 
to fistula care in Nigeria and Uganda. mHealth 2020;6:12.