 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 75  
 
Visual Data Justice?  
Datafication of Urban 
Informality in South Africa 
Using 360o Imaging 
Technologies  
 
JONATHAN CINNAMON  
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
B1. URBAN FRAGMENTAT ION AND INVISIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
B2. THE DATAFICATION OF INJUSTICE IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS  ................................ ............  4 
B3. VISUALIZING INFORMALITY : VERTICAL , OBLIQUE , HORIZONTAL  ................................ ..........  6 
B4. FROM SOCIOECONOMIC TO SOCIOCULTURAL INJUSTICE IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS  ...............  9 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 11 
D. Findings and Discussion  ................................ ................................ ..........  13 
D1.  DATAFICATION AND ITS LIMITS FOR CONTESTING INJUSTICE  ................................ .............  13 
D2.  360°  IMAGING PILOT STUDY FINDINGS  ................................ ................................ .......  15 
D3.  FRAMING , LINEAR PERSPECTIVE , AND VISIBILITY IN 360°  ................................ ................  17 
D4.  DISTRIBUTION AND RECOGNITION THROUGH 360°  STREET VIEWS ................................ .... 19 
D5.  360°  IMAGERY , EXAGGERATED SEEING , AND MISRECOGNITION  ................................ .......  22 
E. Conclusions: Visual Data Justice?  ................................ ............................  24 
E1. SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  24 
E2. RECOMMENDATIONS AN D FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA  ................................ ...................  26 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  28 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 32 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 32 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
1 
 Visual Data Justice?  
Datafication of Urban Informality in South 
Africa Using 360° Imaging Technologies  
 
 Jonathan Cinnamon  
University of Exeter  
  
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Uneven economic development is closely associated with the proliferation of informal 
settlements in the global South, a process generally understood to harbour injustices 
according to a resource access view of society. An understanding of social justice in  terms of 
distribution provides a powerful framework for challenging uneven development, however, 
a key contention of this paper is that further forms of injustice accrue to the residents of 
these places over and above issues of distribution. With its focu s on sociocultural 
representations, recognition provides a basis for ‘making visible’ further injustices that 
threaten dignity and self -identification, which may also act as a preliminary step towards 
advancing socioeconomic justice for informal settlement s. 
 
This paper draws on ongoing research into the datafication of informal settlements in South 
Africa, including interviews with data activists and experiences of conducting a 360° 
geovisual imagery pilot study in Kya Sands informal settlement in Johannes burg. In first 
drawing attention to the limitations of quantitative data for representing injustice, and the 
problematic effects of conventional framed photographs of informality from aerial and 
ground -level perspectives, this paper explores the possibilit ies of ground -level 360° imagery 
as a realist, non -reductionist form of representation for informal settlements. Three 360° 
street views were produced to illustrate key possibilities and limitations for advancing 
recognition, based on the notion that visib ility is essential for recognition. Further, the piece 
reflexively critiques how – through new advancements in image analytics – informal 
settlement visibility projects risk further engendering injustices of misrecognition for these 
highly marginalized urb an spaces.  
 
As such, this paper provides a basis for further inquiry into the relationship between visual 
data and the social justice principle of recognition, towards an emerging research agenda on 
visual data justice . The paper concludes with recommendat ions for practitioners and key 
topics for research . Import ant items on the agenda include:  determining the  forms and 
examples of injustice that can be remedied through datafication, the relationship between 
misrecognition and maldistribution in the context  of datafication, and the acceleration of 
new injustices due to advances in computer vision applied to ground -level imagery.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
“In contemporary discussions, recognition is often accompanied by visibility as its 
political partner. Demands for recognition are also demands for visibility ” (Oliver, 
2001, p.147)  
 
Uneven development  is a significant challenge to cities around the world, particularly in low - 
and middle -income countries with extreme levels of socioeconomic inequality. In many 
global South cities, recent patterns of urbanization and inward migration have produced a 
highly variegated and disconnected urban fabric. Nowhere is this more evident than in 
South Africa, where the world’s highest rates of inequality and uneven developmen t are 
both a consequence of current socioeconomic injustices and a resolutely visible  reminder of 
past apartheid racial policies. The longstanding and intransigent nature of uneven urban 
development means that injustice is often defined in specifically spa tial terms in South 
Africa. However, as data becomes a key focus of urban governance in the country, injustice 
is also increasingly understood in the context of datafication, which draws attention to how 
uneven patterns of data render marginalized spaces a nd their inhabitants invisible  to 
outsiders.  
 
Cities in South Africa actively pursue datafication discourses and ‘smart’ agendas in the 
globally circulating model (Odendaal, 2015) ; however for residents and grassroots 
organizations in Cape Town and Johannesburg, data has also become a means by which 
everyday injustices can be ‘made visible’ (Odend aal, 2006)  in a country with a complex 
politics of visibility that requires one to be “‘seen by the state’ before benefitting from it” 
(Parnell and Pieterse, 2010, p.153) . Data activism has emerged in this context as a strategy 
to contest disparities in the provision of basic services guaranteed by the country’s rights -
based constitution , including water, sanitation, housing, and education. Quantitative, 
evidence -driven activism provides an alternative or supplement to the widespread 
deployment of ‘service delivery’ protests by civil society organizations and residents of 
informal settlem ents, which can often be ignored by municipal governments. Growing 
interest in data activism suggests a tactical shift from the legacy of ‘people power’ in South 
Africa (Bénit -Gbaffou, 2015) , to a new focus on ‘data power’ (Kennedy and Bates, 2017)  
based on an understanding of data as a powerful actor that can inform effectiv e governance 
and policy decisions.  
 
In the context of datafication in governance, business, and wider society, ‘data justice’ (e.g. 
Dencik et al., 2016; Taylor, 2017; Heeks and Renken, 2018)  has emerged as a field of theory 
and praxis that broadly seeks to draw attention to the complex ways that data and social 
justice are interwoven. This includes efforts to trace how data production, accumulation and 
analytics (re)produce social injustice (Cinnamon, 2017; Redden, 2018) , and work that 
actively engages with these practices towards the advancement of normative social justice 
aims, such as emancipation, empowerment, equity, and fairness (Johnson, 2014; Milan a nd 
van der Velden, 2016) . Engaging both of these dimensions, this piece adds to the literature 
on data justice in two ways. First, the piece develops the notion of visual data justice for 
advancing the social justice principle of ‘recognition’ (Honneth, 2004; Fraser, 2008) . Justice -
as-recognition provides a means of identifying and contesting injustices other than those 
that arise as a consequence of socioeconomic inequalities, the primary target of distributive Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
3 
 social justice reparations. Instead, as a sociocultural consideration, recognition is concerned 
with the ability to self -identify and to participate as an equal in society. Although economic  
inequities are important in this context, a focus here on spatial recognition  foregrounds the 
more -than -economic causes and consequences of urban marginality. Doing so 
acknowledges that while urban spatial injustices are clearly aligned with patterns of u neven 
economic development, further forms of injustice accrue to the residents of these places 
over and above inadequate provision of basic services. Thus, making injustices of 
misrecognition visible can be a first step towards remedying injustices of mald istribution.  
 
This project was undertaken in Kya Sands, an informal settlement on the northern periphery 
of Johannesburg. An effectively invisible space unrecorded and unaccounted for in official 
maps, databases, and archives, Kya Sands is known to outside rs primarily though visual 
imagery depicting extreme poverty and hardship (see Figure 1). Taken from above or at a 
considerable distance, these forms of imagery serve as a symbolic representation that 
further marginalizes the residents of these spaces (Hecker, 2010; Dov ey and King, 2011) . 
The aim of this project was to ‘make visible’ the settlement in a very literal, panoramic way 
that might overcome some of the limitations and harms of conventionally -framed images. 
Further, the project is driven by a more general cri tique of datafication in contexts of 
informality – that quantitative data are inadequate for representing injustice in its full 
texture. Three research questions guide this paper:  
 What is the role of quantitative data in representing injustice and advancin g the 
needs of marginalized people and places?  
 How can consumer -grade 360° imaging technologies be used to produce street -level 
imagery of informal settlements?  
 Can a potentially more progressive form of datafication be realised through street -
level 360° i magery?  
 
  
 
Figure 1: Visually imagining Kya Sands.  Google Street View image taken from a distance, 
and image of a fire taken from a low -oblique aerial perspective.  
 
To answer the first question, the paper draws on interviews with ‘data activists’ working in 
informal settlements in Johannesburg and Cape Town. Experiences of conducting the street -
level imagery pilot study in Kya Sands are used to answer the next two questions.  
 
The following section provides a background and conceptual framework for the paper. The 
Methods section explains the study site and data collection activities. The Findings and 
Discussion section initially provides the results of the interviews and pilot study. Through an 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
4 
 exploration of three street views produced about the com munity, this section then develops 
the notion of visual data justice, by tracing the possibilities, limitations, and risks of 360° 
imagery for advancing recognition for invisible urban spaces. This piece concludes with 
recommendations for practitioners int erested in using 360° imagery for informal settlement 
representation, and a consideration of the future research agenda for visual data justice in 
light of this project.  
 
 
B. Background  
 
B1. Urban Fragmentation and Invisibility  
In global South cities, new urban dwellers often take up residence in informal settlements 
on the outskirts of cities, extending municipal boundaries outward, or infilling interstitial 
spaces along transport infrastructure routes, on land unsuitable for formal  structures, or 
other underused or unwanted urban spaces (Dovey and King, 2011) . The notion of urban 
informal settlements as ‘fragments’ (McFarlane, 2018)  both separate from and intimately 
interconnected with the city draws attention to their highly dynamic, shifting, and 
heterogeneous spatial arrangement both internally and in re lation to the surrounding city.  
 
While t he spatial contours of fragmented spaces can be ascertained with relative ease, 
often little is known about the internal spatial structure of informal settlements nor of the 
people who live there. For municipal governments, lack of information on informal 
settlements on the one hand presents an opportunity to ignore the needs of these spaces, 
and on the other, a significant challenge when intervention is necessary. For residents of 
informal settlements, life in an urban fragment is similarly ambivalent. Inf ormal settlement 
living is often defined by precarity and a sense of invisibility and disconnection from the rest 
of the city. These spaces generally have few municipal, social, or health services provided, 
and residents working or enrolled in school or un iversity are often required to travel 
considerable distances. Yet dis -integration from the wider urban fabric may have positive 
implications for residents seeking affordable temporary shelter or to avoid being caught up 
in the machinery of the state.  
 
B2. The Datafication of Injustice in Informal Settlements  
Advancements in digital technologies and data production have opened up new 
opportunities to ‘know’ informal settlements. The term ‘datafication’ is often described as a 
process  of “rendering into data aspects of the world not previously quantified” (Kennedy et 
al., 2015, p.1) , although it is also profitably interrogated in terms of the wider beliefs and 
motivations underlying data and data analytics. Van Dijck’s (2014)  notion of ‘dataism’ 
captures the discursive underpinnings of datafication based on an understanding of 
quantitative data as an objective representation of the world, and also a tool of action and 
change. Beer (2019)  draws attention to a ‘data imaginary’ that frames data analytics as 
speedy (rapid insights), accessible (easily interpreted), revealing (extracting hidden 
knowledge), panoramic (all -seeing), prophe tic (able to foresee and shape the future), and 
smart (p ossessing latent intelligence).  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
5 
 In the case of urban data and the wider smart urbanism agenda, data and data analytics are 
thusly pursued by governments as the solution for urban challenges. As Kitch in explains, 
smart city advocates believe that data “provides the raw material for envisioning and 
enacting more efficient, sustainable, competitive, productive, open and transparent cities” 
(2014, p.1) . For urban residents and civil society organizations, similar beliefs about data 
and data analytics are powe ring new modes of data -driven civic action, taking advantage of 
accessible data production technologies (e.g. mobile phones) and processes (e.g. 
crowdsourcing, citizen science). As part of this wider phenomenon, diverse forms of ‘data 
activism’ have emerge d in cities around the globe, including in South Africa. Data activism 
demonstrates an ambivalent resist/embrace relationship with datafication – as Milan and 
van der Velden explain, the term comprises both “affirmative engagement with data and 
resistance to massive data collection” (2016, p.61) . 
 
Informed by wider datafication discourses, efforts to address urban invisibility through 
dataficati on have come in two main forms. The first, on -the-ground mapping and surveying 
initiatives with varying degrees of local resident participation, is exemplified by the Map 
Kibera project in Nairobi (Donovan, 2012) . This initiative engaged local residents to produce 
spatial data and thematic maps (e.g. location of hospitals, points of interest, perceptions of 
safety) of this huge informal settlement in Nairobi which was previously unmapped and 
largely ignored, despite  being home to as many as 1 million people. In South Africa, one 
form of data activism called a ‘social audit’ has gained widespread uptake within the activist 
communities in Johannesburg and Cape Town. Social audits are collaborative data collection 
initiatives between an organization and local residents which aim to draw attention to 
inadequate service provision. Since 2013, over a dozen social audits have been undertaken, 
collecting data on infrastructure, services, and hazards in informal settlements, h ighlighting 
gaps between expected allocations and the reality on the ground (Social Audit Netw ork, 
2016) . 
 
A second  form of datafication for informal settlements uses aerial remote sensing to 
capture imagery for conversion into spatial data – the ‘slums from space’ approach (Kuffer 
et al., 2016) . While satellite imagery has a long history of use for mapping cities, unmanned 
aerial vehicles (UAVs ) present new opportunities for mapping these dense and highly 
dynamic spaces in much higher spatial and temporal resolution. For instance, Gevaert  et al. 
(2017)  used UAV imagery to algorithmically classify informal settlements for the purposes of 
upgrading, and Mansell (2018)  described the use of DIY balloon -based aerial imaging 
techniques in a Palestinian refugee camp to assert residents’ ‘right to the city’. With both 
approaches h owever, datafication of informal settlements based only on aerial imagery has 
practical limitations in terms of what can be known about these spaces. It can provide proxy 
estimates of socioeconomic conditions (e.g. population size, deprivation), but is pri marily 
used only for the production of geospatial framework data (e.g. vector datasets of roads, 
paths, building footprints, spatial boundaries) (Williams et a l., 2016; Mahabir et al., 2018) . 
 
Critics of mapping and quantitative data have long drawn attention to the way these forms 
of representation shape a limited and partial understanding of the wo rld (e.g. Harley, 1989; 
Crampton, 2001; Aalbers, 2014) . For many feminist and diversity theorists, quantitative 
representation serves to advance the interests of those people and  things that are more 
readily captured by numbers, static categories, and hegemonic forms of knowledge (e.g. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
6 
 Lawson, 1995) . In a study of pa rticipatory efforts to include Rio de Janeiro’s favelas  in 
Google Maps, Luque -Ayala and Neves Maya observed considerable “distance between the 
richness of the mental map of favela dwellers and the spatial simplification and 
standardization required by the global digital map” (2019, p.456) . With this under standing, 
quantitative representation will have only limited use for capturing the dynamics and lived 
realities of life on the ground in informal settlements, which calls into question a variety of 
data -led strategies that seek to advance justice through d atafication.  
 
B3. Visualizing Informality: Vertical, Oblique, Horizontal  
Against this backdrop, constructivist and interpretivist forms of knowledge production are 
also undertaken in an effort to more accurately ‘know’ informal spaces, including 
interviews , participatory methods, and ethnographic research. Within this epistemological 
framing, visual imagery is advanced as a way to represent informal settlements with a 
degree of objectivity, while avoiding the abstractions of quantification. The privileging of 
imagery as an instrument of empirical fact is based on a “naturalistic understanding of vision 
[which] claims that objectivity is achieved by a correspondence between an image and its 
external referent” (Campbell, 2007, p.379) . This linking of seeing with knowing facilitates 
the now widespread use of aerial i mages as evidence of on -the-ground conditions, even 
without converting the imagery to quantitative spatial vector data. The power of vertical 
aerial images (see Figure 2a) to enable access to remote locations without local grounding 
provides new opportunit ies to know these spaces, but they also serve to reinforce power 
asymmetries with other peoples and cultures, through the subjectifying and dominating 
effects of the ‘god’s eye view’ (Parks, 2009) . 
 
Tilting the camera angle from the vertical (nadir) plane of perspective of most satellite 
imagery to an oblique (angled) perspective has become common, especially with the 
advancement of UAVs. Oblique imagery is generally not used to produce quantitative v ector 
data, since the scale of the imagery is different from the image’s foreground to background, 
meaning distance and direction vary. Beyond these practical limitations, oblique imagery 
can have powerful effects in terms of how spaces are understood, dis tinct from the effects 
of vertical imagery’s powerful downward gaze. The ‘high -oblique’ perspective tilts the 
camera angle to a midway point between nadir and ground -level horizontal, providing the 
viewer with both a sense of size and context, as well as l ocal detail and nuance. But the 
‘low -oblique’ perspective tilts the camera to a point that captures the ground at around 30° 
off the nadir view but excludes the horizon altogether (see Figure 2b). This subtle 
adjustment to the plane of perspective produces  imagery that captures the scale of the 
settlements but excludes the anchoring point of the horizon. As Hecker (2010)  explains, this 
limits the potential for documentary realism – the effect on the viewer is to depoliticize 
informality and poverty , offering only abstraction and aestheticization1 of the social realities 
below : 
“the oblique aerial view uses the horizon to seam together the void of the sky and 
the full of the distant landscape. But what happens when the plane of sight turns 
                                                      
1 Here, aestheticization is understood as a process in conflict with politicization . For visual imagery,  particular artistic elements 
and decisions can serve to neuter the political potential of representation . Through such a process , politics and power relations 
“are obscured, becoming incorporated into categories of lifestyle, taste, and patterns of consumption and appreciation of the  
visual, the sensual, and the unique”  (Duncan and Duncan 2001, p.377). This draws  in particular  on Walter Benjamin’s notion of 
the ‘aestheticization of politics ’, as well as ideas about the political potential of representation developed in the field of  visual 
studies . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
7 
 toward the  ground to bracket off the horizon itself?  … This low -oblique plane of 
vision refocuses the dialectic between immensity and an ordering line of sight, away 
from optics of stability and order toward the immensity of the ground below. This 
technique of closi ng off the horizon… could also be seen to occupy another 
interstitial position — existing in between the lofty god -powers of the vertical 
omniscient view and the horizontal comfort of being in the world” (Hecker, 2010, 
p.260) . 
 
Further tilting the camera lens down to ground -level, the horizontal plane of perspective 
offers a form of visuality that may be more attuned to the politics and lived realities of those 
living in informal settlements (see Figure 2c). As Dodge explains, “the action of tilting the 
camera through 90 degrees and the reduction of verticality can be read as a move from the 
disembodied ‘view from nowhere’ to a more human -scale and embodied sense of place” 
(2018, p.955) . Taken at the scale of the social, and at a vantage point closer to the subject 
matter, conventional ground -level photography provides an opportunity for documentary 
realism that captures the re alities of informal settlement living in a way that illustrates 
injustice but negates ab straction and aestheticization.  
 
Yet Linke (2012)  describes how ground -level informal settlement photography is often itself 
an idealist  art form, consumed by global elites drawn in by a carefully -crafted aesthetic of 
resourcefulness and sustainability that occludes the social disadvantage that a more realist 
approach might exude. As the author explains, “the conditions of displacement and  the 
impact of poverty on families or communities are expunged from the visual field by 
transforming poverty artefacts into aestheticized art objects” (p.303 -304) . The ability to 
shape a slum imaginary of ‘bare life’ (Agamben, 1998)  liberated of any political meanin g is 
made possible through the process of ‘framing’. Frames are a necessary, though powerful 
and performative aspect of photographs, whether the plane of perspective is nadir, oblique, 
or horizontal. Framing is an act of inclusion and exclusion; as Judith Butler puts it, it is a 
“delimiting function, bringing into focus an image on the condition that some portion of the 
visual field is ruled out” (2007, p.953) . Choosing the frame  and linear perspective 
determines the arrangement of objects and composition of the photograph, which, as 
Cosgrove explains, “determines – in both senses – the ‘point of view’ to be taken by the 
observer, and … the scope of reality revealed” (1985, p.48) . 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
8 
  
 
Figure 2 a, b, c: Tilting the camera lens – Kya Sands through vertical, low -oblique, and 
horizontal planes of perspective . Aerial photos in 2a and 2b from Unequal Scenes project 
(https://unequalscenes.com/kya -sandsbloubosrand ). Ground -level photo in 2c by author.  
 
 
Through avoiding the need to frame the visual field and allowing the viewer to choose the 
visual perspective, developme nts in 360° photography suggest  new possibilities for visually 
representing informal settlements, and a potential move away from aestheticization and 
abstraction towards realist representation (see Figure 3).  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
9 
  
 
Figure 3: Ground -level photo of Kya Sands in 360 ° (rendered as a flat projection here), and 
a conventional photo frame as reference. 360° photo by author. 360°  perspective diagram 
from: https://www.fotografie -tutorials.de/2011/03/18/panoramafotografie -teil-01-
einfuhrung -blickwinkel -und-asthetik/  
 
 
Google Street View (GSV) is “practically synonymous” (Alvarez León and Quinn, 2019, p.2)  
with 360° street -level representation in most settings. GSV was initially released in 2007 in 5 
cities in the US, and  since has expanded to all continents, however the platform’s coverage 
is both spatially and temporally uneven. GSV first visited the African continent in advance of 
the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. A decade later, much of the imagery collected from 
more marginalized areas of Cape Town and Johannesburg has yet to be updated, meaning 
users of GSV are presented with an inaccurate representation of these highly dynamic and 
mutable urban spaces. In contrast, regular updating is standard procedure in many pla ces in 
the global North. For Kya Sands and many informal settlements in South Africa and beyond, 
coverage is generally absent altogether. The landscape of 360° imagery production is rapidly 
expanding however, spurred on by new actors producing imagery for the autonomous 
vehicle market, the recent availability of low -cost consumer grade cameras and software, 
and the development of alternative platforms for hosting this imagery outside of GSV 
(Alvarez León and Quinn, 2019) . Since 2013, 360° photo/video cameras have become widely 
available, from entry -level models that attach to a smart phone, higher spec versions for 
outdoor sports, to professio nal grade models used in industry.2 
 
B4. From Socioeconomic to Sociocultural Injustice in Informal Settlements  
The social justice principle of ‘recognition’ provides the framework for analysis of this case 
study. Depending on the nuances of how the princip le is interpreted, recognition describes a 
form of justice bound up in contestations over social status and identity at the level of 
individuals and societal groups, based on the belief that “human dignity comprises a central 
principle of social justice” (Honneth, 2004, p.352) . An interest in recognition arose in the 
1990s as justice theorists identified the limitations in the prevailing normative focus of social 
justice, distribution. Associated in particular with the  influential work of John Rawls (1971) , 
distributive justice efforts often identify injustices in society resulting from the  unequal 
allocation of ‘goods’ and ‘bads’ in society, which could be as broad as income, resources, 
rights, and freedoms, but in practice, material resources and economic wealth are the most 
widely recognized focus of distributive justice reparations (Miller, 1999) . Justice -as-
recognition provides a framework for identifying and addressing forms of injustice 
associated with  sociocultural processes of indignity, disrespect, and stigmatization, which 
                                                      
2 An overview of developments in consumer, intermediate, and professional grade 360o imaging, virtual tour software, and 
related technologies is available here: http://blogs.exeter.ac.uk/360/developments -in-360-imaging -technology/  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
10 
 might be related to issues of distributive injustice, but which manifest as status inequalities 
and threats to agency and identity formation (see Fraser and Honneth, 2003) . 
 
Misrecognition then is the paradigmatic injustice under this principle. For Honneth’s 
identity -based model, to be misrecognized by others is a threat to self -realization, 
autonomy, and the development of an intact identity (Honneth, 2004) . Here, 
(mis)recognition is produced in inte rsubjective relations, through (lack of) “respect in the 
political sphere, esteem in the social sphere, and care in the intimate sphere of the family” 
(Kompridis, 2007, p.278) . Alternatively, for Fraser’s status -based model, to be misrecognized 
is a threat to parity of participation in social life caused by institutionalized patterns of 
subordination (Fraser, 2005) . In this interpretation, misrecognition aligns with and is 
connec ted to distributive justice in its focus on inequality – misrecognition produces uneven 
patterns of societal participation, which could mirror or supplement uneven allocations of 
material resources. Although the two models have been said to be incompatible , Thompson 
(2009)  explains how the ability to participate as an equal in society can be understood as a 
necessary e lement to achieving identity recognition in the eyes of others. Thus, full 
recognition can be achieved by designing institutions and opportunities that ensure parity of 
participation, which will set up the parameters of a society that fosters relationships  of 
dignity and respect, ensuring self -realization for all identity groups.  
 
Irrespective of a focus on status equality, identity, or their interconnections, misrecognition 
is understood as a deeply embedded injustice that impacts marginalized individuals,  groups, 
and indeed places , over and above distributive forms of injustice. Visual imagery plays an 
important role in shaping who is recognized, and who recognizes. Whether aerial or at 
ground -level, techniques of framing and linear perspective in conventi onal photographs are 
performative acts of misrecognition, accelerating the ‘othering’ of already marginalized 
people and places. Campbell (2007, p.359)  explains the symbolic potency of photographs of 
the Darfur conflict for how outsiders imagine Africa – not as a vast continent with a diversity 
of landscapes and people but  as “a single entity marked by an iconography of despair, 
disaster and disease ”. 
 
At the urban scale, conventional photography can contribute to the symbolic  discrediting of 
places, as part of a specifically geographic process of misrecognition referred to as 
territorial, or spatial stigma (Wacquant et al., 2014) . Like Goffman’s theory of personal 
stigma as ‘spoiled identities’ shaped through intersubjective stereotyping, spatial stigma 
explains the processes by which residents of defamed places come to be regarded by 
outsiders as embodied manifestations of them. As Slater explains, “urban dwellers at the 
bottom of the class structure are discredited and devalued not simply because of their 
poverty, class position, ethnoracial origin, or religious affi liation, but because of the places  
with which they are associated” (2017, p.113) . The effects of this form of misrecognition are  
both physical and material; research has demonstrated how residents of stigmatized places 
face additional health challenges (Tabuchi et al., 2012; Keene and Padilla, 2014)  and 
reduced employment prospects (Kallin and Slater, 2014)  independent of other factors (e.g. 
socioeconomic status) . Visual imagery is central to the advancement of stigmatizing 
discourses about informal settlements, because this is typically the key way that outsiders 
come to know these spaces, diffracted through the power relations, abstractions, and 
aestheticization s inherent to conventional photographic representation.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
11 
  
Recognition is thus intimately bound up with present and historical patterns of differential 
visibility, “which has positioned certain bodies as objects of recognition and granted others 
the power to  confer recognition”, meaning “ [s]truggles for recognition are also struggles for 
visibility ” (Hesford, 2015, p.536 -537, emphasis added) . This paper develops  the concept of 
visual data justice as a way of connecting digital visual representation to recognition, 
foregrounding the power of visual imagery in shaping how people come to understand 
other people and places. Enhanced visibility through visual represen tation provides 
opportunities for neglected and marginalized peoples and places to achieve recognition in 
the eyes of others; however, central to any notion of visual data justice must be an 
understanding that visibility itself is essentially neutral – it is in its intentions, effects, and 
contestations that recognition or misrecognition are advanced. In this paper, this 
understanding of visual data justice is developed through a 360° street -level imagery pilot 
project. Findings described below shed light o n the potential of non -framed visual 
perspectives for advancing recognition, and more generally provide a basis for application of 
the concept to a variety of existing and emerging forms of ground -level visual 
representation.  
 
 
C. Methods  
 
The empirical evidence for this piece is drawn from interviews with data activists, and 
experiences of conducting a 360° imagery research project in Kya Sands, Johannesburg. Kya 
Sands is a typical informal settlement in sub-Saharan Africa, with shack housi ng, limited 
public infrastructure and services, and a presence that is largely invisible in government and 
private sector maps and databases (see Figure 4). The settlement was initially established in 
the early 1990s, and is now home to an estimated 20,000  people. Kya Sands is divided into 
four sub -areas (A,B,C,D) located on a combination of private and state -owned land. State 
provision (and maintenance) of services is minimal, including communal water standpipes, 
chemical toilets, and high mast lighting.  
 
Interviews with over 25 data activists in Johannesburg and Cape Town were conducted to 
gather perspectives on the value of quantitative data for representing and drawing 
attention to service provision needs in informal settlements.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
12 
  
 
Figure 4: Kya Sands i n Google Maps. The map view depicts the settlement as a blank space, 
while the satellite view shows the basic spatial structure of the settlement. The blue lines 
indicate Google Street View coverage. To the east of Kya Sands is the wealthy suburb of 
Bloubosrand, and to the west is the Kya Sand industrial area.  
 
 
Next, a 360° imagery pilot study was conducted, as part of a multi -strand, mixed methods 
project involving researchers from universities in Johannesburg and beyond, with varying 
degrees of par ticipation from local residents and community leaders. The imagery project 
used consumer -grade cameras and software to capture the settlement in 360°. Images were 
taken with a Garmin VIRB360 camera, a mid -range option that features two 180° lenses, 
automat ic in-camera image stitching, and a GPS sensor to record geographic coordinates. 
Since the settlement is comprised of narrow paths and rough terrain, imagery was captured 
on foot using a hand held monopod positioned over the photographer’s head, who was 
later edited out.  
 
Images were captured over five days in April, September, and October 2017. The aim was to 
capture images at regular intervals throughout all of the paths and common spaces of the 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
13 
 settlement, however this was not possible given time constra ints and because of concerns 
over environmental health conditions in some areas (open waste, dirty water).  A pragmatic, 
ad-hoc strategy was developed, capturing key common spaces in the settlement and larger 
paths. A local resident involved in the larger p roject accompanied the photographer, 
assisting with navigation and providing input on the optimal locations to take the 
photographs and appropriate features to record. The project was discussed with several 
groups of community leaders who provided permissi on for the research. A larger public 
meeting was then held at a local childcare facility to introduce the research team and 
project to the wider community. Our aim was to engage more fully with any interested 
community members; generally there was support for the project however there was little 
interest in developing a participatory research design.  
 
Adobe Photoshop was used for minor post -processing tasks, including general imagery 
enhancements and removal of the photographer and monopod using the Polar C oordinates 
projection and Clone Stamp tool. The next step was to assemble the imagery to produce 
immersive views of the settlement. 360° photos can now be hosted on a small number of 
Web platforms including Facebook and Flickr, but specialized ‘virtual tou r’ software is 
required to link the images together for navigation between the images and on an 
accompanying interactive map. The project initially tested three options; two desktop -based 
packages, Panotour Pro from Kolor/GoPro and the open source krpano, and the lightweight 
Roundme web -based platform. Roundme was chosen for its intuitive development 
interface, social web -style sharing and commenting features, integration with a web based 
interactive map (Google Maps), imagery and tour hosting, embedding of  tours on blogs and 
websites, and the ability to embed additional text and multimedia to imagery as ‘hotspots’.  
 
 
D. Findings  and Discussion  
 
The Findings and Discussion section provides the basis for addressing  the three research 
questions: 1) W hat is the  role of quantitative data in representing injustice and advancing 
the needs of marginalized people and places? 2) How can consumer -grade 360° imaging 
technologies be used to produce street -level imagery of informal settlements? 3) Can a 
potentially more p rogressive form of datafication be realised through street -level 360° 
imagery?  
 
D1. Datafication and its Limits for Contesting Injustice  
Informed by distributive notions of social justice and discourses of datafication, 
quantitative, data -driven social aud its have become a key strategy for making uneven 
service provision visible and actionable in informal settlements in South Africa. Interviews 
with a wide variety of activists and civic data champions provide insight into the aims and 
outcomes of data -led a ctivism. Data activists aim to provide ‘factual’ evidence of spatial 
discrepancies in service provision. One interviewee explained, “we’re not working with, like, 
opinion and subjectivity, well, not necessarily, you know, we’re working with data” 
(Employee , civic data organization). These ‘counter -data’ (Currie et al., 2016; Dalton et al., 
2016; Meng and DiSalvo, 2 018)  actions are driven by a belief that policymaking requires 
quantitative evidence. As an interviewee noted, “taking an evidence based approac h Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
14 
 enables us to speak on the same terms as government” (Employee, social auditing 
organization). Quantitative representations of informality are pursued as powerful leverage 
for drawing attention to distributive injustices, as  another interviewee explained : 
“You are showing them their facts , to say – it’s a fact that you are paying [a 
contractor] to do this and we are saying we don’t see the value for that money. So, 
you need to stop it, or you need to rectify it, or you need to take some people to 
task to make sure that this money is spent properly” (Interviewee, activist 
organization, emphasis added).  
 
The findings of social audits are highly contested however, and overall, they have had little 
success in convincing policymakers to address the serious issues raised. Officials have 
challenged and dismissed findings by claiming the results are not a real r epresentation of 
service provision, focusing their critique on technical considerations such as data quality, 
sample size, and suitability of methods (Rossouw, 2015) . An interviewee from a n activist 
organization explains the resistance tactics: “[t]here are various ways that they tried to 
undercut a piece of evidence that was actually factually true. Attack the sender. [Attack] 
your method… And once a powerful figure says ‘that’s not true’,  where do you go with 
that?”  
 
A government response to a social audit conducted by the activist organization Equal 
Education (2016)  on school infrastructure sums up the wider official response to social 
audits: “The WCED [Western Cape Education Department] is always open to constructive 
critique and analysis of how we operate… This critique and analysis should, however, be 
grounded in realism ” (emphasis added).  This government response to social audit findings is 
typical; though initially, the resistance took many activists by surprise. One activist described 
his astonishment:  
“I certainly believed this quite naively in the first few y ears that, if only you can 
prove people wrong in the public domain that, in this war of ideas, you put this 
idea, they put this idea, you tell them that they’re wrong and then somehow that 
leads to them saying ‘you know what, you’re right, you convinced us  and we’re 
going to change what we do here. We had no idea, you’re absolutely right’” 
(Interviewee, activist organization).  
 
Overall, the interviews illustrate how attempts to make injustice visible through quantitative 
evidence have been easily dismissed by governments, with their “greater claims to data” 
(Rossouw, 2015, p.79) . This finding adds further dimensionality to the notion that 
quantitative data may be unsui table for representing the lived realities and complexities of 
informal settlements. It is not just that quantitative data are reductive and shape a partial 
understanding of the world; when produced by the grassroots, quantitative data are also an 
easy tar get upon which governments can focus their resistance and deflection tactics 
(Cinnamon, forthcoming) . Findings here provided the rationale for the 360° imaging pilot 
study. 360° visual imagery suggests possibil ities for digital forms of informal settlement 
representation that may overcome the limitations of quantitative data and conventionally 
framed imagery, a contention that is considered in detail below.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
15 
 D2. 360° I maging Pilot Study Findings  
The 360° imagery pilot study produced a total of 112 panoramic images of the settlement 
across all four sub -areas (A -D). Selected images were used to produce three separate street 
views using the Roundme platform. Figure 5 shows the platform in edit mode, with the 360° 
image viewing panel on the left and the interactive map (Google Map satellite view) 
showing the position of the images on the right. Navigation between images is possible by 
clicking on the image ribbon, on the links embedded in the 360° imag es, or on the 
thumbnails on the map. The first street view, the Kya Sands Tour,  was designed as a virtual 
tour of the settlement, starting from one of the main entry points in to Kya Sands from 
Agnes Ave (see Figure 6 and https://roundme.com/tour/258779/info ). The tour is 
comprised of 27 images from all sub -areas of the settlement. The tour approximates the 
experience of GSV, although in most places there are larger distances between each image, 
and fewer  opportunities to choose the direction to navigate through the settlement.  
 
 
Figure 5: Screenshot of the Roundme interface, in edit mode.  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
16 
  
Figure 6: Entry page for the Kya Sands ‘virtual tour’ street view.  
 
Following the overall aims of those engaging i n social audit activism in South Africa, and 
informal discussions with residents about their key concerns about living in Kya Sands, the 
second street view highlights service provision, infrastructural, and environmental hazard 
issues in Kya Sands. This Kya Sands - Services and Hazards  street view includes 10 images 
from around the settlement (see https://roundme.com/tour/391902/info ). Images show the 
placement of municipal services including water standp ipes, outhouse toilets, and high mast 
lighting, as well as informal electricity connections, open water and waste, a recently 
installed bridge over the stream, and several informal childcare and community facilities.  
 
The third street view was produced to illustrate the nuance and diversity of the settlement, 
highlighting not only hazards and limited infrastructure but also the broader story of Kya 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
17 
 Sands. Information gathered from the wider research project, as well as the limited amount 
of information abou t Kya Sands on the web, were used to compile  the Kya Sands Stor y, 
which made use of Roundme’s interactive ‘hotspot’ functionality to embed text, web links, 
conventional photographs, and videos into the street view’s thirteen 360° images (see 
https://roundme.com/tour/391926/view/1354277/ ). The story  contains various details 
about the settlement, its history, information about its residents, employment and 
entrepreneurial activities, the range of building materials used, and the local markets, 
shops, and community facilities. Rather than using a linea r tour structure, no links are 
provided within the imagery, to encourage the user to navigate more freely by clicking on 
the image ribbon and map.  
 
D3. Framing, L inear Perspective, and Visibility in 360°  
Wider access to 360° imagery production provides new  opportunities to represent 
marginalized areas that might avoid the consequences of framing and fixed linear 
perspective. Positioned perpendicularly (and imagined oppositionally) to the vertical, 
ground -level 360° imagery offers an alternative to the subje ctifying gaze of the nadir 
perspective and the abstractions of low -oblique (see Harris, 2015) , while also enabling the 
viewer to navigate through a full panoramic field of vision. This f orm of imagery may also 
counter the limitations of quantitative data; as Shapiro (2017, p.2)  explains in the context of 
GSV, “its emphasis on the particularities of place rather than cartographic a bstractions of 
space makes it seem progressive, absolved from the visual -semiotics of scientific rationality 
or objectivity”.  
 
However, as the de facto  platform for 360° urban representation, GSV has additional powers 
that can lead to injustices for urban spaces and the people who live there. GSV is generally 
understood as a “simulation of the city of the present” (Campkin and Ross, 2012, p.148) , 
however its uneven coverage is complicit in shaping perceptions of economic and cultural 
value. Absent ima gery is a signal to viewers that places are not worthy of our virtual or 
physical attention. Power et al. (2012)  describe how GSV’s peripheral coverage of a 
marginalized Irish housing estate – which initially made the area visible only from the 
distance of a main road – served to advance negative perceptions of the area in the minds 
of outsiders. Such processes of intersubjective stereotyping are central to injustices of 
misrecognition, whereby less powerful groups are subject to ‘distorted identities’ which can 
impact the ir dignity and sense of self (Zurn, 2003) . 
 
Kya Sands, and many informal settlements in South Africa and beyond, are similarly only 
visible in GSV from the vantage point of peripheral roads. As a demonstration of the 
potential for producing street view imagery outside of the GSV platform, the Kya Sands Tour 
provides an immersive, 360° visual representation of the settlement, picking up where GSV 
coverage ends. The tour leads the viewer through the settlement, proceeding first through 
Area A, along the path that crosses Kya Sands stream, through Areas B and C on the west 
side, and then back over the stream on the footbridge and through Area D. Although the 
tour does enable the viewer to visually explore all four sub -areas of the settlement, 
coverage is fragmented;  this was due to practical reasons, however the viewer may 
interpret uneven coverage in ways that could have negative implications for parts of the 
settlement not covered, similar to the effects of uneven GSV coverage.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
18 
 The Kya Sands Tour could be made acc essible for public viewing on the Roundme platform; 
doing so would demand more consideration about how such imagery could be used as 
virtual form of ‘slum tourism’. Slum tourism is a highly contested activity held up as both an 
example of the exploitation of the urban poor for the entertainment of outsiders, and an 
effective way to draw attention to hidden injustices. If conventional images of informality 
are understood to aestheticize and depoliticize poverty, slum tourism is often legitimized by 
claiming that exposing outsiders to lived realities first hand might avoid this – they are not 
only an aesthetic encounter, but also a moral and epistemological one (Dovey and King, 
2012) . If recognition is formed through intersubjective relations of r espect and 
understanding, careful slum tourism provides an opportunity to advance not only 
distributive but also justice -as-recognition claims for informal settlements and their 
residents. Frenzel et al. (2014, p.431)  claim that while slum tours in South Africa expose 
economic injustices to outsiders including policy makers, they also have symbolic power to 
challenge sociocultural misrecognition, through “addressing invisibility, overcoming 
territorial stigma and [the]  empowerment of the urban poor”. But will virtual  slum tours 
have the same effect, without the benefit of physical presence and a tour guide? 360° 
imagery potentially provides an opportunity for outsiders to experience these spaces in a 
way that may be sym pathetic to reality, but at what point does realism descend into 
spectacle, and then to misrecognition?  
 
With regards to framing and linear perspective, the viewer is able to manipulate the imagery 
in any direction, approximating the human eye’s position a bove ground -level and dynamic 
plane of perspective, which enables an effectively seamless upward, downward, and 
sideways gaze. Cosgrove (1985, p.48)  explains how realist representation of three -
dimensional space on two -dimensional surfaces “gives the eye absolute mastery over 
space” through the rules of geometry, which draws the viewer to the artist or photographer 
located outside  of the image. Although the viewer of 360° imagery is empowered to 
continually change the frame and perspective, the photo capture -position seemingly within  
the image amplifies the sense of the photographer or viewer’s ‘mastery over space’, as 
inseparable from it. Gazing downward in the ima ges solidifies this sense of being in the 
image, since the photographer has been edited out and the viewpoint appears to hover 
above the ground (see Figure 7). Thus it may be said that, akin to the power of aerial 
imagery, 360° imagery may also exhibit a g od’s eye view, but much nearer to ground -level. 
From a visual -cognitive perspective, more attention to how viewers perceive space through 
this seemingly ‘immersive’ imagery is needed. From a social and political perspective, more 
attention is needed to the  particular power geometries of immersive imagery, when the 
geometries of linear perspective are not fixed yet the viewer is still drawn to the 
photographer located ambivalently outside and within the image.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
19 
  
Figure 7: The downward gaze of 360° imagery.  
 
D4. Distributio n and R ecognition through 360° Street Views  
As illustrated in the Kya Sands – Services and Hazards  street view, 360° imagery could be 
used to fulfil similar objectives as quantitative social audits, to draw attention to uneven 
service provision as an issue of distributive injustice. For many social audits, the typical 
approach has been to ‘let the data  speak for themselves’, although as those engaged in this 
form of data activism have discovered, data are a relatively easy target to contest. 
Moreover, data may have little to say about injustice in its full texture. Quantitative data is 
limited in the wa y that it represents space as a container comprised of discrete objects 
devoid of context, which is limiting in any setting, but may be particularly incompatible with 
the fluid, dynamic, and ultimately hori zontal ontology of informality.  
 
Dovey and King’s (2011; 2012)  work articulates this slippage. As the authors explain with 
reference to Kevin Lynch’s pioneering work on urban imaginaries, instead of discretized 
representations, “[t]he image of the informal city… is often found in the interstices of 
Lynch ’s categories of ‘paths’, ‘edges’ and ‘landmarks’” (2011, p.26) , which suggests a need 
for representations that capture informal settlements as continuous, fully textured places. 
The Kya Sands – Services and Hazards street view  was designed to document the services, 
infrastructure, and environmental hazard issues in the settlement in a way that might more 
effectively represent real -world impacts and wider contexts. Through immersive 360° 
imagery, the viewer is exposed to the lived realities of collecting water at communal 
standpipes, open water from leaking standpipes flowing down dirt paths, the dilapidated 
condition of outhouse toilets, household waste disposed in open spaces, and e lectricity and 
flooding hazards (e.g., see Figure 8).  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
20 
  
Figure 8: Screenshot of the Kya Sands –Services and Hazards street view showing waste 
disposal and open water from leaking standpipe.  
 
Although further evidence is needed, this less reductive and abstr act form of datafication 
may prove more convincing and less easy to dismiss by government officials. Social audit 
findings are typically widely circulated to government officials and online upon completion 
of the project. The Services and Hazards street vi ew could help to provide the wider context 
and real -world impacts of distributive injustices, especially if combined with the voices of 
residents themselves. Instead of a standalone approach, the street views may be best suited 
to represent distributive in justices alongside other forms of representation. However, a key 
argument of this piece is that any attempt to advance distributive justice for marginalized 
places must first seek to establish spatial recognition  for such places, particularly in settings 
in which being ‘seen by the state’ is a necessary first step towards obtaining basic services 
(Parnell and Pieterse , 2010) . 
 
This argument provides the basis for the Kya Sands Story . As Taylor (1994, p.25, emphasis 
added)  argues, because ide ntities are often shaped by relations of misrecognition, “a person 
or group of people can suffer real damage, real distortion, if the people or society around 
them mirror back to them a confining or demeaning or contemptible picture of themselves .” 
Drawing  on research in a marginalized area of Berlin, Cuny (2018)  identifies three visual -
representational strategies residents employ for managing and contesting such demeaning 
representations of the place they live. First, some residents of defamed areas internalize 
stigma, submitting to outsider s’ perceptions but distancing themselves from other residents 
they deem to embody the negative characteristics. Second, residents counter and resist 
negative representations, through production of counternarratives. Thirdly, residents can 
try to  reverse the stigma, by constructing stigmatizing r epresentations of the majority.  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
21 
  
Following the second strategy, the aim of the Kya Sands Story  was to develop 
“counterstigmatizing images” (Cuny, 2018, p.4 )  that reveal a more detailed and nuanced 
picture of the sett lement through 360° imagery and further text and multimedia embedded 
as ‘hotspots’ (see Figure 9). The Kya Sands Story  can be compared with another visual 
imagery project designed to tell a hidden story about urban inequalities. The ‘Unequal 
Scenes’ ( https://unequalscenes.com/ ) drone project produces vertical and oblique aerial 
photos and videos documenting gross spatial disparities in South Africa. These ‘dialectical 
images’ (Dovey and King, 2012)  typically depict urban decay and informal settlements 
butting up awkwardly against wealthy suburbs and golf courses (including Kya 
Sands/Bloubosrand, see Figures 2a and 2b). The photographer  explains the motivation:  
“Inequalities in our social fabric are ofte ntimes hidden, and hard to see from 
ground -level… I defy the traditional power structures that keep these inequalities 
hidden so well from every direction except directly above. If the images provoke 
uncomfortable feelings of fear, despair, or an unsettlin g realization of complicity 
– good. They are intended to.” (Miller, 2018) . 
 
These images certainly provoke uncomfortable feelings through a novel visual perspective, 
and there is a political potency that could be useful for drawing attention to the country’s 
spatial inequalities. However I argue that their power to make these inequalities visible 
must be weighe d against their power to aestheticize and depoliticize poverty, which can 
reduce the complexities of life in informal settlements to a universalizing story of suffering 
and hardship. In the Kya Sands/Bloubosrand Unequal Scenes aerial video 
(https://unequalscenes.com/kya -sandsbloubosrand ), the opening text – splashed across a 
low-oblique perspective of the settlement – declares, “ The story of Kya Sands is a story of 
ash, smoke, and broken promise s”. This text, combined with the specific aerial perspective 
chosen, offers little possibility for viewer agency, and little chance of a nuanced 
understanding of the sett lement.  
 
The story of Kya Sands is partially one of poverty and informality, but it is  also a relatively 
well-established residential area with residents that come from a variety of backgrounds 
and occupations, which may not align with common perceptions of informal settlements. 
The objective of producing the Kya Sands Story  was to make vis ible the rather more complex 
and diverse realities of informal settlement living, which the viewer can experience in a 
selective, non -linear, and interactive way. By self -navigating through the settlement, 
choosing the linear perspective of the 360° imager y, interacting with the additional 
multimedia content and web links provided in the hotspots, I argue that the viewer is 
provided greater opportunity to form an opinion of the settlement beyond the suffering 
trope.  
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
22 
  
Figure 9: Screenshot of Kya Sands Story showing a 360°  image taken at the boundary 
between the settlement and the neighbouring suburb of Bloubosrand. The image is 
embedded with two interactive ‘hotspots’ with text, links to further web content, and a video 
depicting the visual inequalities  between the residential areas, as captured by the Unequal 
Scenes drone aerial imagery project.  
 
D5. 360°  Imagery, Exaggerated Seeing, and Misrecognition  
The notion that 360° visual representation can lead to recognition rests on at least two key 
assumptio ns. The first assumption is that any form of visibility is desirable or at least 
necessary to draw attention to highly marginalized urban fragments. The second 
assumption is that this specific type of visual imagery could enable a less reductive form of 
datafication that might align better with an ontology of informality, sidestepping the 
limitations of quantitative representation and aerial perspectives. Although the previous 
section considers these ideas with caution, future research should also pay atten tion to the 
potential for additional harms in which enhanced 360° visibility leads to advanced injustices 
of misrecognition. Here, feminist philosopher Kelly Oliver’s (2001)  distinction between good 
and bad forms of visibility for marginalized groups is useful. Oliver describes good visibility 
as ‘responsible vision’; bad visibility, however is more complex – it may simply involve 
invisibility, or it may involve various forms of ‘ exaggerated seeing’  including hypervisibility, 
stereotyping, and making a spectacle (p.149). Here I briefly consider one potential 
unintended use of these Kya Sands street views to illu strate how 360° imaging might be 
implicated in one form of exaggerated seeing, hypervisibility.  
 
With little information available about the settlement from government or private sector 
sources, the 360° street views are perhaps the most extensive collecti on of representational 
artefacts for Kya Sands. But in moving toward visibility and (potentially) recognition, there is 
the risk of going too far, of hypervisibility. With the proliferation of digital imaging 
technologies and image hosting platforms, combi ned with deep learning artificial 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
23 
 intelligence (AI), imagery is poised to become the biggest source of quantitative data about 
cities. The status of street views as a potentially less reductive form of datafication 
disregards the possibility of quantificat ion through emerging forms of image analytics and 
computer vision, which are ironically referred to as ‘recognition’ techniques. As with aerial 
imagery, automated feature recognition for ground -level imagery is rapidly developing 
within an emerging field l abelled ‘urban science’, partly due to the push to produce three -
dimensional models of urban space for autono mous and smart vehicle markets.  
 
The use of GSV as a tool for virtual auditing of the built environment is well -established 
(Rundle et al., 2011; Iannelli and Dell’Acqua, 2017) , however significant advances in image 
analytics now enable highly detailed, automated extraction and quantification of objects 
and people. Some image recognition techniques, such as convolutional neural networks, 
require little if any human training o r oversight. These techniques have been used to 
estimate land use and socioeconomic characteristics of urban neighbourhoods in fine grain 
detail (Law et al., 2018; Srivastava et al., 2018) . Gebru et al. (2017)  analyzed 50 million GSV 
images using computer vision recognition techniques, claiming to be able to accurately 
predict local income, race, education, and  voting patterns by identifying the make, model, 
and year of all motor vehicles in a neighbourhood. Dodge describes these processes as 
“analogous to the use of overhead imagery and remote sensing, but for urban streetscapes” 
(2018, p.955) . However, I argue that undertaking these processes on 360° street -level 
imagery of formerly invisible spaces could accelerate their hypervisibility to a degree not 
possible with aerial imagery, precisely because of the detail captured at the ground -level 
plane of perspective.  
 
Governments and private sector are collaborating on urban analytics problems, with the aim 
of reducing the cost of data collection using conve ntional in -situ approaches. While these 
techniques may provide opportunities to ‘know’ invisible spaces in a rapid and cost effective 
way, this extreme form of datafication and hypervisibility could accelerate the abstract and 
reductive understanding of ur ban spaces, with harmful consequences for residents. Scholars 
in surveillance studies have drawn attention to the goals of surveillance in the digital era, 
explaining how contemporary forms of surveillance are rarely concerned with monitoring 
and disciplin ing individual bodies. Rather, contemporary ‘dataveillance’ is about segmenting 
society for capitalist and social control objectives, a process referred to as ‘social sorting’ 
(Lyon, 2003) . Image analytics in urban science is effectively concerned with analogous 
processes of ‘spatial sorting’  – segmenting space into highly refined categories for ca pitalist 
exploitation, or to target and profile the people associated with them (Wood, 2017) . 
 
Even though the shift 90 degrees – from vertical, to oblique, to street -level – is 
conceptualized as a shift from quantitative to qualitative forms of datafication, from 
abstraction to human experience, from aestheticization to realism, street -level image 
analytics introduces the possibility of advancing  injustices of misrecognition as p laces (and 
the people associated with them) are defined, categorized, and ranked according to 
socioeconomic worth or risk. For example, it has become well known that predictive 
analytics advances processes of social and racial stereotyping, which leads to misrecognition 
for already marginalized people (Jefferson, 2018) . Taylor (2017)  describes how ma chine 
learning approaches applied to aerial imagery of migrants could be used to categorize 
behaviours, predict migration patterns, and restrict potential ‘undesirables’ from claiming Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
24 
 asylum. Naik et al.’s (2016)  application of these techniques to GSV imagery demonstrates 
how these forms of analytics, but applied to urban features and based in criminological 
theory (e.g. Bro ken Windows Theory), could be accelerated via the ground -level visual 
perspective, at an “unprecedented resolution and scale” (p.129). In a situation of computer 
vision, “ street -level ceases to be a progressive antidote to the spatial abstractions of aeria l 
imaging , but instead has its own set of power geometries, stemming not from the 
abstraction of vertical perspective but from abstraction by ‘datafication’” (Shapiro, 2017, 3) . 
 
For informal settlements, predictive analytics derived from highly detailed 3 60° imagery will 
pose considerable threats to the community’s ability to self -identify, suggesting caution is 
needed when engaging in this form of datafication. For the purposes of this pilot study, 
imagery is likely too low -resolution for these forms of i mage analytics, and it has not yet 
been shared widely beyond the project team. Further research will be required to 
determine whether such imagery advances responsible vision or exaggerated seeing.  
 
 
E. Conclusions : Visual Data Justice?  
 
E1. Summary  
Beyond  the distribution of ‘goods’ and ‘bads’ in society, further forms of injustice accrue to 
the residents of informal settlements over and above inadequate access to basic services 
and exposure to environmental risks. In foregrounding the importance of identi ty formation 
and the status hierarchy, recognition provides a basis for considering injustices that 
threaten the dignity of residents of informal settlements through invisibility, in a country in 
which visibility is considered a basic prerequisite for equa lity. This paper draws on 
interviews from data activists about the role of quantitative data in advancing distributive 
justice aims, and a pilot study to reflexively consider the potential of immersive, 360° street 
views for advancing recognition for infor mal settlements. Through exploration of key issues 
emerging from the production of three different types of street views for the settlement, 
the paper provides a basis for further enquiry into the role of 360° imagery and other 
immersive visual technologie s in shaping how informal spaces are recognized by outsiders. 
Findings from the project provide answers  to the three guiding questions.  
 
The first question was what is the role of quantitative data in representing injustice and 
advancing the needs of margi nalized people and places?  Interviews with data activists 
suggested that quantitative data on its own has limited potential as a ‘tool’ of visibility. 
Since informal settlements often “disappear from the cognitive map of those who allocate 
resources” (Dovey and King, 2011, p.22) , social audits in South Africa are pragmatically 
designed to make them visible to policy makers, and in doing so, they often highlight gaps 
between budgeted allocation of services and the reality on the ground. Yet the data 
themselves have become the target of resistance, providing an opportunity for governments 
to deflect attention away from the substantive issues, rendering the realities of informal 
settleme nt living further invisibilized. Because of this, the findings suggest that quantitative 
data, on their own, have limited potential to ‘make visible’ service delivery injustices. This 
finding adds further dimensionality to a growing understanding that conv entional forms of 
quantitative representation (e.g. statistics, maps, static categories) may be unsuited to an Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
25 
 ultimately horizontal, fuzzy, and dynamic ontology of informality. More broadly, it calls into 
question the limitations of any attempt to datafy injustice.  
 
The second question was how can consumer -grade 360° imaging technologies be used to 
produce street -level imagery of informal settlements?  The idea for the 360° imagery pilot 
study emerged from three observations:  the limitations of quantitative data as described 
above, wider critiques of aerial approaches to representing informal spaces, and the uneven 
coverage of Google Street View. Against this backdrop, the pilot study sought to advance 
the potential for newly -accessible technologies to be used to produce ground -level 
immersive 360° imagery of informal settlements. The project answered the question by 
demonstrating how street -level imagery of Kya Sands could be produced using consumer -
grade hardware and software  and a systematic imagery collection strategy. Three street 
views were produced for the settlement, the Kya Sands Tour , Kya Sands – Services and 
Hazards , and the Kya Sands Story .  These findings provide a basis for further research and 
practice into the pr oduction of 360° imagery for representing not only informal settlements, 
but other less visible urban spaces.  
 
The third question was can a potentially more progressive form of datafication be realised 
through street -level 360° imagery?  This pilot study p rovides preliminary evidence of the 
potential for progressive datafication through panoramic visual representation, but it also 
raises further questions about the risks of image -based datafication. The Kya Sands Tour 
was designed to broadly resemble the Go ogle Street View aesthetic and mode of user 
interaction, providing a ‘virtual tour’ through the four sub -areas of the settlement. Picking 
up where Street View ends, such tours could provide outsiders a deeper understanding of 
informal settlements, and more  speculatively, they might help to register such spaces as not 
separate from but intimately interconnected with the wider city. This tour does however 
raise questions about the potential benefits or  harms of virtual slum tourism.  
 
The Services and Hazards street view was designed to illustrate the realities of living in areas 
subject to limited provision of basic services and exposure to hazards, a goal akin to those of 
quantitative social audits, demonstrating distributive injustice. Yet, this street view may be 
less open to resistance and deflection from policy makers compared to the abstractions and 
reductionism of data -driven forms of representation. The Kya Sands Story specifically 
diverges from the GSV aesthetic and mode of user interaction, with the g oal of telling a 
more detailed and nuanced story of the settlement compared to the reductionist narrative 
propagated by framed aerial and ground -level imagery. The lack of framing and linear 
perspective arguably provides the viewer with a degree of agency and greater chance of a 
nuanced u nderstanding of the settlement.  
 
These findings thus point to the potential of this imagery for advancing the social justice 
principle of recognition for informal settlements – a possibility that might more broadly be 
refer red to as spatial recognition (cf. Luque -Ayala and Neves Maia, 2019) . Yet, as speculated 
in the final section, when highly detailed, panoramic ground -level imagery is used for other 
purposes – including automated urban space classification using computer vision techniques 
– it may have the opp osite effect of rapidly accelerating spatial misrecognition, which calls 
into question the notion of such imagery as a more realistic, sympathetic, or progressive 
form of datafication.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
26 
  
E2. Recommendations and Future Research Agenda  
This piece is driven by  the notion that ground -level 360° geovisualities might offer new 
opportunities to advance recognition for marginalized people and places, however potential 
is largely speculative at this stage. As a key topic of future enquiry, research should engage 
pote ntial viewers of such representations (e.g. citizens, officials, policy makers) to 
understand what the imagery invokes in both residents and outsiders, and what it makes 
possible in terms of visibility and recognition. This aligns with a call by Harris (2015, p.611) ; 
as the author implores, “[t]here is … a need for more engagement with how different 
people actually respond to and experience aerial (and ground -level) views, and how  
different distances from the ground and different planes of vision (vertical, oblique, or low -
oblique) shape contrasting relationships with cities”. This paper however suggests a further 
dimension of enquiry, focusing on how different people respond to an d experience 
immersive 360° views when the frame and fixed plane of perspective are discarded. A 
follow -on project is in planning, designed around research questions about the added value 
of a street -level imagery approach for advancing visibility and reco gnition for informal 
settlements, compared with quantitative representation strategies. These questions could 
be answered through a full research study involving participatory design and data collection, 
sharing of imagery with the community and municipal government, as well interviews with 
all stakeholders including participants, residents, activist organizations, and public officials.  
 
More generally, findings of the project suggest the following core questions for future 
research and practice on visual r epresentation of informal settlements:  
 How can digital representations be produced in a more participatory way, given the 
technical nature of imagery collection and management and the lack of formal 
governance structures in many informal settlements?  
 How m ight a truly ‘insider’ view diverge from a version diffracted through a research 
process?  
 What processes are appropriate for engaging wider stakeholders such as ‘virtual 
tourists’ and policy makers?  
 What forms of image ownership and sharing are appropriate , and is it possible to 
prevent harms from unintended uses of imagery?  
 
This paper also suggests at least three topics that must be central to the wider research 
agenda for data justice. First, and perhaps foremost, it points to the limitations of 
conventi onal forms of quantitative data for representing injustice. Since a considerable 
portion of the emerging literature on data justice – particularly the ‘data activism’ strains – 
hinge on the idea that (in)justice can be datafied (see discussions in Dourish and Gómez 
Cruz, 2018; Gutierrez and Milan, 2018; Kennedy, 2018) , findings from the interviews su ggest 
that more consideration of this basic tenet is needed. Of course, the beliefs of those 
working in this area are more nuanced, however I suggest that the future agenda for data 
justice must look more carefully to a much longer history of critical enqu iry on the societal 
impacts of data (e.g. Westin and Bak er, 1972) . The field of smart cities and data -driven 
urbanism provides a current, parallel area of enquiry that could be more closely integrated 
with urban data justice. Amongst other things, work in this area draws attention to a 
disconnect between per ceptions of what data are and what data can achieve, and the 
reality in practice – their ‘imagined affordances’ (Nagy and Neff, 2015; Baack, 2018) . A key Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
27 
 future research question for data justice then is, what forms and exa mples of injustice can 
be remedied through datafication, and which are left invisible by it?  For activism -related 
practices specifically, what is gained and lost when energies are shifted from ‘people power’ 
to ‘data power’?  
 
Second, in drawing a connectio n between state inattention to distributive injustices and 
community invisibility, this research suggests that recognition must be a core concern of 
data justice, if only as a preliminary step towards addressing inequities in material resources 
and basic s ervices. A future research agenda should seek to address questions such as what 
is the relationship between misrecognition and maldistribution in the context of 
datafication ? Yet recognition is a contested and often vaguely described notion, with 
considera ble discord over the meaning even in those who espouse it. How and when 
recognition is achieved (or not) is not objectively and widely agreed upon between 
stakeholders. Because of the ambiguity, a future agenda for recognition within data justice 
should se ek to develop normative frameworks for assessing data -related (mis)recognition. 
Fraser’s notion of ‘participatory parity’ (2008)  provides one such normative ideal that could 
be used to judge when recognition has been achieved. This suggests further research 
questions: what does parity of participation look like in a datafying world, a nd what is the 
relevance of this concept amidst growing resistance to participating in processes of 
datafication ? 
 
Thirdly, in relation to the above two points, this research suggests that more attention as to 
the status of visual imagery in relation to da tafication must be on the agenda of future work 
in data justice. A key aim of this pilot study was to develop a non -quantitative digital 
representational strategy that might overcome limitations of surveys, maps, and other 
reductive forms of representation . While the findings and discussion suggest meaningful 
possibilities for representing informality in a way that is sympathetic to informal spaces and 
their residents, the status of imagery as a somehow more realist and less reductive form of 
datafication m ight be highly naïve. This project specifically grappled with a growing sense of 
unease about the imagery, in part because a limited degree of participation risked our 
speaking on behalf of the community, but more so because of the potential for unintended  
uses of the imagery once released for wider access.  
 
The first concern could be addressed with a future project based on a fully participatory 
design, however addressing the second concern will require considerably more attention. 
There is growing evidenc e of individual - and group -level injustices derived from big data 
surveillance (Dencik et al., 2016) , from commercial analysis of digital behav ioural data 
gleaned from use of the web, mobile phones, and smart technologies (Zuboff, 2015; Taylor 
et al., 2017) , and through processes of ‘function creep’ whereby data collected for one 
reason is then analyzed for another unjust purpose (Cinnamon et al., 2016; Heeks  and 
Renken, 2018) . A small amount of attention has been paid to data injustice in the context of 
aerial imagery analytics (e.g. Taylor, 2017)  however a future agenda for data justice m ust 
give more credence to the notion of images -as-data, and specifically, the new forms of 
analytics they make possible. This will soon become a more ‘visible’ problem, as AI and 
computer vision techniques are increasingly applied to photos of people and p laces in rich, 
ground -level detail, rendering ‘born quantitative’ data merely a drop in the urban data 
bucket.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
28 
 References  
 
Aalbers, M. B. (2014). Do maps make geography? Part 1: redlining, planned shrinkage, and 
the places of decline. ACME: An International E -Journal for Critical Geographies,  13(4), 
525-556.  
Agamben, G. (1998). Homo sacer: Sovereign power and bare life. Redwood City, CA: 
Stanford University Press.  
Alvarez León, L. F. & Quinn, S. (2019). The value of crowdsourced street -level imagery: 
Examining the shifting property regimes of OpenStreetCam and Mapillary. GeoJournal,  
84(2), 395 -414.  
Baack, S. (2018). Civic Tech at mySociety: How the Imagined Affordances of data shape data 
activism. Krisis: Journal for Contemporary Philoso phy,  (1), 44 -56. 
Beer, D. (2019). The data gaze: Capitalism, power and perception. London: Sage.  
Bénit -Gbaffou, C. (2015). Introduction: Politicising and politicking community participation 
in urban governance. In Bénit -Gbaffou, C. (Ed.) Popular politics i n South African cities: 
Unpacking community participation. 1-17. Cape Town: HSRC Press.  
Butler, J. (2007). Torture and the ethics of photography. Environment and Planning D: 
Society and Space,  25(6), 951 -966.  
Campbell, D. (2007). Geopolitics and visuality:  Sighting the Darfur conflict. Political 
Geography,  26(4), 357 -382.  
Campkin, B. & Ross, R. (2012). Negotiating the city through Google Street View. In Higgott, 
A. & Wray, T. (Eds.) Camera constructs: Photography, architecture and the modern city. 
147-158. Farnham: Ashgate.  
Cinnamon, J. (2017). Social injustice in surveillance capitalism. Surveillance & Society,  15(5), 
609-625.  
Cinnamon, J. (forthcoming). Attack the data: Agency, power, and technopolitics in South 
African data activism. Annals of the America n Association of Geographers . 
Cinnamon, J., Jones, S. K. & Adger, W. N. (2016). Evidence and future potential of mobile 
phone data for disease disaster management. Geoforum,  75 253-264.  
Cosgrove, D. (1985). Prospect, perspective and the evolution of the la ndscape idea. 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,  10(1), 45 -62. 
Crampton, J. W. (2001). Maps as social constructions: Power, communication and 
visualization. Progress in Human Geography,  25(2), 235 -252.  
Cuny, C. (2018). Residents’ respons es to ‘territorial stigmatization’: visual resea rch in Berlin. 
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,  In press . 
Currie, M., Paris, B. S., Pasquetto, I. & Pierre, J. (2016). The conundrum of police officer -
involved homicides: counter -data in Los Angeles County. Big Data & Society,  3(2), 1 -14. 
Dalton, C. M., Taylor, L. & Thatcher , J. (2016). Critical Data Studies: A dialog on data and 
space. Big Data & Society,  3(1), 1 -9. 
Dencik, L., Hintz, A. &  Cable, J. (2016). Towards data justice? The ambiguity of anti -
surveillance resistance in political activism. Big Data & Society,  3(2), 1 -12. 
Dodge, M. (2018). Mapping II: News media mapping, new mediated geovisualities, mapping 
and verticality. Progress i n Human Geography,  42(6), 949 -958.  
Donovan, K. (2012). Seeing like a slum: Towards open, deliberative development. 
Georgetown Journal of International Affairs,  13(1), 97 -104.  
Dourish, P. & Gómez Cruz, E. (2018). Datafication and data fiction: narrating dat a and 
narrating with data. Big Data & Society,  5(2), 1 -10. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
29 
 Dovey, K. & King, R. (2011). Forms of informality: Morphology and visibility of informal 
settlements. Built Environment,  37(1), 11 -29. 
Dovey, K. & King, R. (2012). Informal urbanism and the taste f or slums. Tourism 
Geographies,  14(2), 275 -293.  
Duncan, J. S. & Duncan, N. G. (2001). The aestheticization of the politics of landscape 
preservation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers,  91(2), 387 -409.  
Equal Education (2016). Of “loose papers  and vague allegations”: A social audit report on 
the safety and sanitation crisis in Western Cape Schools. Cape Town: Equal Education.  
Fraser, N. (2005). Reframing justice in a globalizing world. New Left Review,  3669-88. 
Fraser, N. (2008). Abnormal justice. Critical Inquiry,  34(3), 393 -422.  
Fraser, N. & Honneth, A. (2003). Redistribution or recognition?: A political -philosophical 
exchange. Brooklyn, NY: Verso.  
Frenzel, F. (2014). Slum tourism and urban regeneration: Tourin g inner Johannesburg. 
Urban Forum,  25(4), 431 -447.  
Gebru, T., Krause, J., Wang, Y., Chen, D., Deng, J., Aiden, E. L. & Fei -Fei, L. (2017). Using deep 
learning and Google Street View to estimate the demographic makeup of neighborhoods 
across the United Stat es. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,  114(50), 
13108 -13113.  
Geissler, R. C. (2011). Private eyes watching you: Google Street View and the right to an 
inviolate personality. Hastings Law Journal,  63 897-926.  
Gevaert, C. M., Persello, C., Sliuzas, R. & Vosselman, G. (2017). Informal settlement 
classification using point -cloud and image -based features from UAV data. ISPRS Journal 
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,  125 225-236.  
Gutierrez, M. & Milan, S. (2018) . Technopolitics in the age of big data: The rise of proactive 
data activism in Latin America. In Cabellero, F. S. & Gravante, T. (Eds.) Networks, 
movements and technopolitics in Latin America: Critical analysis and current chalenges. 
95-109. London: Sprin ger. 
Harley, J. B. (1989). Deconstructing the map. Cartographica,  26(2), 1 -20. 
Harris, A. (2015). Vertical urbanisms: Opening up geographies of the three -dimensional city. 
Progress in Human Geography,  39(5), 601 -620.  
Hecker, T. (2010). The slum pastoral: H elicopter visuality and Koolhaas’s Lagos. Space and 
Culture,  13(3), 256 -269.  
Heeks, R. & Renken, J. (2018). Data justice for development: What would it mean? 
Information Development,  34(1), 90 -102.  
Hesford, W. S. (2015). Surviving recognition and racial in /justice. Philosophy & Rhetoric,  
48(4), 536 -560.  
Honneth, A. (2004). Recognition and justice: Outline of a plural theory of justice. Acta 
Sociologica,  47(4), 351 -364.  
Iannelli, G. & Dell’Acqua, F. (2017). Extensive exposure mapping in urban areas through 
deep analysis of street -level pictures for floor count determination. Urban Science,  1(2), 
1-13. 
Jefferson, B. J. (2018). Predictable policing: Predictive crime mapping and geographies of 
policing and race. Annals of the American Association of Geographers,  108(1), 1 -16. 
Johnson, J. A. (2014). From open data to information justice. Ethics and Information 
Technology,  16(4), 263 -274.  
Kallin, H. & Slater, T. (2014). Activating territorial stigma: Gentrifying marginality on 
Edinburgh's periphery. Environment and  Planning A,  46(6), 1351 -1368.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
30 
 Keene, D. E. & Padilla, M. B. (2014). Spatial stigma and health inequality. Critical Public 
Health,  24(4), 392 -404.  
Kennedy, H. (2018). Living with data: Aligning data studies and data activism through a focus 
on everyday exp eriences of datafication. Krisis: Journal for Contemporary Philosophy,  
(1), 18 -30. 
Kennedy, H. & Bates, J. (2017). Data power in material contexts: Introduction. Television & 
New Media,  18(8), 701 -705.  
Kennedy, H., Poell, T. &  van Dijck, J. (2015). Data and agency. Big Data & Society,  2(2), 1 -7. 
Kitchin, R. (2014). The real -time city? big data and smart urbanism. GeoJournal,  79(1), 1 -14. 
Kompridis, N. (2007). Struggling over the meaning of recognition: A matter of identity, 
justice, or freedom? European Journal of Political Theory,  6(3), 277 -289.  
Kuffer, M., Pfeffer, K. & Sliuzas, R. (2016). Slums from space —15 years of slum mapping 
using remote sensing. Remote Sensing,  8(6), 1 -29. 
Law, S., Seresinhe, C. I., Shen, Y. & Gutierrez -Roig, M. (2018). Street -Frontage -Net: urban 
image classification using deep convolutional neural networks. International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science,  In press  
Lawson, V. (1995). The politics of difference: Examining the quantitative/quali tative dualism 
in post -structuralist feminist research. The Professional Geographer,  47(4), 449 -457.  
Linke, U. (2012). Mobile imaginaries, portable signs: Global consumption and 
representations of slum life. Tourism Geographies,  14(2), 294 -319.  
Luque -Ayala , A. & Neves Maia, F. (2019). Digital territories: Google maps as a political 
technique in the re -making of urban informality. Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space,  37(3), 449 -467.  
Lyon, D. (Ed.) (2003). Surveillance as social sorting: Privacy, risk, and digital discrimination, 
London: Routledge.  
Mahabir, R., Croitoru, A., Crooks, A., Agouris, P. & Stefanidis, A. (2018). A critical review of 
high and very high -resolution remote sensing approaches for detec ting and mapping 
slums: Trends, challenges and emerging opportunities. Urban Science,  2(1), 1 -38. 
Mansell, C. M. (2018). A change of perspective: Aerial photography and “the right to the 
city” in a Palestinian refugee camp. In Ristovska, S. & Price, M. (Ed s.) Visual imagery and 
human rights practice. 213-228. London: Palgrave Macmillan.  
McFarlane, C. (2018). Fragment urbanism: Politics at the margins of the city. Environment 
and Planning D: Society and Space,  36(6), 1007 -1025.  
Meng, A. & DiSalvo, C. (2018).  Grassroots resource mobilization through counter -data 
action. Big Data & Society,  5(2), 1 -12. 
Milan, S. & van der Velden, L. (2016). The alternative epistemologies of data activism. Digital 
Culture & Society,  2(2), 57 -74. 
Miller, D. (1999). Principles of social ju stice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Miller, J. (2018). Unequal scenes - by Johnny Miller. Available from: 
https://unequalscenes.com/about -contact . 
Nagy, P. & Neff, G. (2015). Imag ined affordance: Reconstructing a keyword for 
communication theory. Social Media + Society,  1(2), 1 -9. 
Naik, N., Raskar, R. & Hidalgo, C. A. (2016). Cities are physical too: Using computer vision to 
measure the quality and impact of urban appearance. Ameri can Economic Review,  
106(5), 128 -32. 
Odendaal, N. (2006). Towards the digital city in South Africa: Issues and constraints. Journal 
of Urban Technology,  13(3), 29 -48. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
31 
 Odendaal, N. (2015). Getting smart about smart cities in Cape Town: Beyond the rhetoric. In 
Marvin, S., Luque -Ayala, A. & McFarlane, C. (Eds.) Smart urbanism: Utopian vision or 
false dawn? 87-103. London: Routledge.  
Oliver, K. (2001). Witnessing: Beyond recognition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.  
Parks, L. (2009). Digging into Goo gle Earth: An analysis of "Crisis in Darfur". Geoforum,  40(4), 
535-545.  
Parnell, S. & Pieterse, E. (2010). The ‘right to the city’: institutional imperatives of a 
developmental state. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,  34(1), 146 -
162.  
Power, M. J., Neville, P., Devereux, E., Haynes, A. & Barnes, C. (2012). ‘Why bother seeing 
the world for real?’: Google Street View and the representation of a stigmatised 
neighbourhood. New Media & Society,  15(7), 1022 -1040.  
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of j ustice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Redden, J. (2018). The harm that data do. Available from: 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the -harm -that-data -do/. 
Rossouw, J. (2015). “True, reliable and valid?” Data and community experience in the case 
of the janitorial service social audit. Master of Philosophy. Department of Development 
Studies, University of Cape Town.  
Rundle, A. G., Bader, M. D. M., Richards, C.  A., Neckerman, K. M. & Teitler, J. O. (2011). 
Using Google Street View to audit neighborhood environments. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine,  40(1), 94 -100.  
Shapiro, A. (2017). Street -level: Google Street View’s abstraction by datafication. New 
Media & Society,  20(3), 1201 -1219.  
Slater, T. (2017). Territorial stigmatization: Symbolic defamation and the contemporary 
metropolis. In Hannigan, J. & Richards, G. (Eds.) The S age handbook of new urban 
studies. 111-125. London: S age Publications Ltd.  
Social Audit Network (2016). About Social Audit Network . Available from: 
http://socialaudits.org.za/about/ . 
Srivastava, S., Vargas Muñoz, J. E., Lobry, S. & Tuia, D. (2018). Fine -grained landuse 
characterizati on using ground -based pictures: A deep learning solution based on globally 
available data. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,  In press . 
Tabuchi, T., Fukuhara, H. & Iso, H. (2012). Geographically -based discrimination is a social 
dete rminant of mental health in a deprived or stigmatized area in Japan: A cross -
sectional study. Social Science & Medicine,  75(6), 1015 -1021.  
Taylor, C. (1994). The politics of recognition. In Guttman, A. (Ed.) Multiculturalism: 
Examining the politics of reco gnition. 25-74. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
Taylor, L. (2017). What is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms 
globally. Big Data & Society,  4(2), 1 -14. 
Taylor, L., Floridi, L. & van der Sloot, B. (Eds.) (2017). Group privacy: New challenges of data 
technologies, Dordrecht: Springer.  
Thompson, S. (2009). Participatory parity and self -realisation. Good Society Journal,  18(1), 
57-62. 
van Dijck, J. (2014). Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: big data between scientific 
paradigm and ideology. Surveillance & Society,  12(2), 197 -208.  
Wacquant, L., Slater, T. & Pereira, V. B. (2014). Territorial stigmatization in action. 
Environment an d Planning A,  46(6), 1270 -1280.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 75  
32 
 Westin, A. F. & Baker, M. A. (1972). Databanks in a free society: Computers, record -keeping 
and privacy. New York: Quadrangle.  
Williams, N., Quincey, D. &  Stillwell, J. (2016). Automatic classification of roof objects from 
aerial imagery of informal settlements in Johannesburg. Applied Spatial Analysis and 
Policy,  9(2), 269 -281.  
Wood, D. M. (2017). Spatial profiling, sorting and prediction. In kitchin, R., Lauriault, T. P. & 
Wilson, M. W. (Eds.) Understanding spatial media. 225-234. London: Sage.  
Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information 
civilization. Journal of Information Technology,  30(1), 75 -89. 
Zurn, C. F.  (2003). Identity or status? Struggles over ‘recognition’ in Fraser, Honneth, and 
Taylor. Constellations,  10(4), 519 -537.  
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowsh ip funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support from  Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . The empirical research was conducted during the author’s  
visiting fellowship at Wits University, which was funded by the South African National 
Research Foundation and UK Newton Fund.  Thanks to research participants and residents of 
Kya Sands.  
 
About the Author  
Jonathan Cinnamon is a  broadly trained  human  geographer  and geographic information 
scientist  with a research focus  on datafication and the expansion of digital technologies in 
urban, health, and development contexts. His work develops  methods  for d ata production 
and visualization for low -resource settings , and attends to  the ethical and political 
implications of data and technologies in processes of social change.  This research  has been 
funded by research councils in Canada, South Africa, and the Uni ted Kingdom.  
 
 
 
 