i
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?
Why Invest in ICTs 
for Agriculture?CTA Discussion Paper
ABOUT CTA
The Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA) is a joint international institution of the African, 
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States and the European Union (EU). 
CTA operates under the framework of the Cotonou Agreement and is funded by the EU.
For more information on CTA, visit www.cta.int
ABOUT CTA DISCUSSION PAPERS
CTA Discussion Papers are commissioned reviews of information on topics related to the Centre’s work. They 
are intended to inform future work by CTA and its partners and to stimulate further discussion.
DISCLAIMER
This work has been made possible with the financial assistance of the European Union. However, the contents remain the sole responsibility of its author(s) and can under no circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position of CTA, its co-publisher or the European Union, nor of any country or member State. The user should 
make his/her own evaluation as to the appropriateness of any statement, argument, experimental technique or 
method described in the work.
This work is the intellectual property of CTA and its co-publishers. 
Its dissemination is encouraged for private study, research, teaching, under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode), provided that appropriate acknowledgement is made:
- of CTA’s copyright, in accordance with the license Creative Commons 4.0, and of EU financing, by including the 
name of the author, the title of the article and the following notice “© CTA 2018 EU financing”, 
- and that CTA’s or its co-publishers or EU’s endorsement of authors’ views, products or services is not implied in 
any way, by including the standard CTA disclaimer.
© CTA, 2018
 
ISBN: 978-92-9081-640-9
Why Invest in ICTs  
for Agriculture?CTA Discussion Paper
TECHNICAL REVIEWER
Dr Benjamin Kwasi Addom
CTA, The Netherlands
AUTHORS
CHAPTERS 1 AND 3:
Dr Ir Alexander Tetteh Kwasi Nuer, Lecturer, Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, 
University of Cape Coast, Ghana
Dr Daniel Agbeko, Senior Lecturer and Director of Business Development,  Regent University College of 
Science and Technology, Accra, Ghana
Mr Worlali Senyo, Senior Consultant, Farmerline Limited, Ghana
 
CHAPTER 2:
Dr Moses Mwangi Thiga, Lecturer and Researcher Computer Science and Information Technology, 
Kabarak University, Kenya
Mr Simon Ndogo Ndungu, County Agribusiness Development Officer, County Government of Kakamega, 
Kenya
Ms Mary Wangari Mutiga, PhD Student, Community Studies and Extension, Egerton University, Kenya
 
CHAPTER 4:
Lee H. Babcock, PhD, MBA, Managing Director, LHB Associatesiv
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Table of contents
Acronyms v
Executive summary vi
Introduction 1
References 2
Chapter 1: Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture  
for investment  3
Introduction 3
Results 6
References 17
Appendix 1: Ensibuuko-Uganda Funding Strategy (2016-2017) 20
Appendix 2: Ensibuuko Strategy and Solution 21
Appendix 3: Framework for a national e-agriculture vision 22
Chapter 2: Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 23
Introduction 23
Why ‘for profit’?  23
Potential areas for investment 24
New agricultural management options 25
Current and future technological trends 27
Entrepreneurship and human resource development 30
References 34
Chapter 3: Challenges of ICTs in agriculture 37
Contents 37
Introduction  37
References 43Appendix 45
Chapter 4: Areas of investment 46
Introduction 46
Conclusion 63
Acknowledgement 64
References  65v
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Acronyms
Acronyms
ACP  African, Caribbean and Pacific
AFA  Mercy Corps’ AgriFin Accelerate
AIS Agriculture Innovation System
AR4D Agriculture Research for Development
CARICOM Caribbean Community
CED Chief Ecosystem Director
CFA  Connected Farmer Alliance
CKW Community Knowledge Worker
CSP Cross-Sectoral Partnership
CWA  Caribbean Week of Agriculture
EU European Union
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP Gross Domestic Product
IAF Impact Assessment Framework
ICT Information and Communication Technology
ICT4Ag Information and Communication Technology for Agriculture
ICT4D Information and Communication Technology for Development
INGO International Non-Governmental Organisation
IoT Internet of Things
ITU International Telecommunication Bureau
KPI Key Performance Indicator
LWR  Lutheran World Relief
ME&L Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
MFI Micro-Finance Institution
MMAP Malawi Mobile Money Accelerator Project
MNO Mobile Network Operator
MUIIS Market-led User-owned ICT4Ag-enabled Information Service
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
PESTEL Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Legal
PPP Public-Private Partnership
R&D Research and Development
ROI  Return on Investment
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
UAV  Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
USAID United States Agency for International Developmentvi
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Executive summary
Executive summary
With the ability to reach many farmers with 
timely and accessible content, the use of  information and communication technologies (ICTs) for agriculture (ICT4Ag) has the potential 
to transform farming and food production, 
worldwide. ICT4Ag supports new methods in the monitoring and management of  soils, plants and livestock (precision agriculture), access to online markets, and improved communication between value chain stakeholders, among others. The services provided are vital in connecting farmers with the information they need to 
improve their agricultural productivity and 
reduce poverty .
Through case studies and examples of  ICT4Ag 
initiatives from across Asia, the Caribbean and 
sub-Saharan Africa, the first chapter looks at how ICT4Ag actually works to drive economic development across developing economies. Further, the chapter reviews the ICT applications, infrastructure and resources built, 
as well as the policies and frameworks put in 
place by international bodies, governments and practitioners to ensure that ICT4Ag becomes viable for investment. 
To ensure longevity of  ICT4Ag services and 
initiatives, ongoing finance is required after any initial funding runs out. The second chapter outlines the need for viable business models – with profit as the end goal – to entice private 
sector players to become involved in the 
provision of  ICT4Ag services, and to ensure sustainability of  the sector. Suitable areas for potential investment, such as food traceability , reducing post-harvest losses, and remote sensing 
for precision agriculture are explored.
Universal access to ICT4Ag has not yet been 
achieved, especially in the rural areas of  developing countries. By drawing on case studies and interviews with practitioners from the field, and by outlining the nature of  the challenges facing ICT4Ag, the third chapter explains the constraints to widespread adoption. The chapter 
also explores how the challenges identified can 
inform investment opportunities, as well as policy recommendations, in order to unleash the full potential of  ICTs in development programmes. 
To accommodate future scaling of  ICT4Ag 
applications and platforms, an integrated, cross-sectoral partnership (CSP) approach that 
includes, for example, farmers, agribusinesses, 
financial institutions, mobile network operators and donors, is necessary . The fourth chapter explains the theory behind CSPs as entities with 
the expertise and vision to successfully deliver 
ICT4Ag solutions, and provides examples of  CSPs already in practice, along with lessons learned. The chapter also provides a three-step framework for ICT4Ag investment, which includes the implementation of  ICTs into 
payment systems, marketing, agriculture 
extension and supply chain management 
 
by CSPs. 
In this final chapter, the different types of  CSP 
investors are also described, as well as their roles 
within the partnership, and their investment priorities within the three-step framework. According to the author, priority investments for donors and foundations include the design and 
delivery of  training to raise awareness of  
ICT4Ag and market research to assess the demand for ICT services. Mobile network operators, on the other hand, should increase their investment in the training of  personnel to 
better understand the challenges facing 
agribusinesses in order to increase subscriptions, and scale-out their services among agricultural stakeholders.1
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Introduction
Introduction
Farming is the most important economic activity 
in many developing countries. In Africa alone, about 65% of  the labour force is employed in the agricultural sector, which generates about 32% 
of  gross domestic product (GDP). It is therefore 
interesting to note that millions of  farmers are still trapped in poverty . The reasons are multiple but notably include the unavailability of  credit, lack of  market information, limited availability of  agricultural extension and advisory services for farmers, as well as the lack of  information and communication technologies (ICTs) for 
agricultural development (Aker and Mbiti, 2010).  
The urgent need to meet the world’s food 
demand in a productive and sustainable way 
presents enormous opportunities for innovations 
using ICTs for agriculture (ICT4Ag). Technologies such as SMS applications, mobile banking and satellite data, for instance, are successfully providing agricultural stakeholders with access to farm mapping and weather data, 
marketing tools, financial credit and advice from 
extension workers. Greater access to such information enables farmers to make more informed daily decisions regarding their agricultural activities, leading to improved 
productivity and profitability , and increased 
resilience to the impacts of  climate change.
However, ICT4Ag faces obstacles that prevent the 
dissemination and utilisation of  ICTs in rural 
settings – particularly the lack of  infrastructure and 
reception coverage, cost of  purchase, management and maintenance of  ICT facilities and products, as well as the almost non-existence of  institutional structures to govern ICT4Ag initiatives. A further 
constraint to ICT4Ag is funding. Piloting and 
development of  ICT4Ag technologies and initiatives in developing countries has mainly relied on donor funding, and this has been dwindling in recent years. There is also little action in the areas 
of  innovative financing, such as microfinancing by 
financial institutions, to help transform the sector 
from donor-driven funding and aid to sustainable 
business models.And yet, with significant investment gaps in the sector, there is huge potential for the scaling out of  ICT4Ag technologies and services. The areas for investment include, but are not limited to, the 
rolling out of  farm management software 
solutions in rural areas of  low- and middle-income countries; ICT solutions that address post-harvest losses and reduce wastage; data analysis software that helps both large and small-scale farmers understand their data; affordable technologies for remote sensing; and the extension of  3G networks to rural areas in 
order to facilitate increased access to ICT4Ag. 
The mainstreaming of  ICT4Ag initiatives is a 
challenge in many developing countries due to a 
lack of  clear strategy and the failure to create 
synergies with other sectors. If  ICT4Ag is to help address the problems of, for example, access to credit and market information, as well as the Sustainable Development Goals, agricultural transformation increasingly requires “all 
stakeholders – including governments, donors 
and the private sector to align and target their investments” (Mayaki, 2016). Cross-sectoral partnerships (CSPs) in the field of  ICT4Ag would help to institutionalise the use of  ICT4Ag, 
and would strengthen linkages, mitigate risks, 
overcome complexities, and dramatically increase the likelihood of  successful ICT4Ag products and services along the value chain (Sarni et al., 2016).
This publication analyses the outcomes and 
impact of  ICT4Ag use and adoption across developing countries through selected country and area-specific case studies. The evidence 
highlights which services and initiatives are 
benefiting agricultural stakeholders and commodity value chains, and draws attention to the constraints that need to be addressed to achieve universal access to ICT4Ag. The 
publication concludes with a three-step 
framework for ICT4Ag investment and looks to 
the future of  ICT4Ag delivery via ‘bundled 
functionalities’ and a cross-disciplinary , partnership approach.REFERENCES
2
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?References
Aker, J. C. and Mbiti, I. M. (2010). ‘Mobile 
phones and economic development in 
Africa’. The Journal of  Economic Perspectives , 
24(3), 207-232. 
Mayaki, I. (2016, May 11). ‘3 ways to transform 
agriculture in Africa’. World Economic Forum blog.
Sarni, W ., Mariani, J., Kaji, J. (2016). ‘From dirt 
to data: The second green revolution and the Internet of  Things’. Deloitte Review, Issue 
18.3
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
CHAPTER 1 
Evidence of the development 
and use of ICTs in agriculture for 
investment 
Using evidence derived from developing country 
case studies and a political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal (PESTEL) analysis, this chapter looks at how ICT4Ag is working across developing economies. Results from this chapter show that there is much potential for investors and entrepreneurs to take 
advantage of  enabling environments created by 
governments and related partners to invest in the ICT4Ag sector, across the developing world. 
Introduction
In the last two decades, ICTs have become formidable tools used by many development (Aina, 2012; CTA, 2013), research, academia, and industry practitioners (David et al., 2011) to 
reach out, as well as disseminate knowledge and 
expertise to target groups, communities and individuals (World Bank, 2012; CTA, 2014; FAO-ITU, 2016). In the year 2000, there were only 738 million mobile phone subscribers 
worldwide; as of  2015, there were over 7 billion 
subscribers constituting more than half  the world’s population (ITU, 2015). In Africa alone, there were over 650 million users of  mobile phones in 2010 (Aker and Mbiti, 2010), this has risen to about 226 
million, with the average price of  mobile phones 
hovering around €135 in 2015 (GSMA, 2015). Thus, there is hope for agricultural information delivery through the use of  ICTs such as radios, videos, digital cameras, emails, telephones, 
televisions, the internet and mobile phones. 
Harnessing mobile phone technology and using 
it appropriately can build trust in transactions with farmers, leading to increased confidence in 
ICT services and the content they provide. This 
is crucial for economic development in all African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries. To do this, scholars, policymakers, lobbyists, as well as related practitioners, suggest that farmers 
should not be given information that is unreliable 
or of  poor quality and difficult to use (FAO-ITU, 2016; CTA, 2014). It is argued that the content of  the information delivered should be more important than the mode of  delivery (Dentoni et al., 2012; Mabe and Olade, 2012). Ideally , local farmers benefit from ICT devices and data, but most of  the time these datasets are large and complex, and therefore cannot be used by their 
target group (Mabe and Oladele, 2012).
ICTs have a transformative influence on farming 
and food production in countries where the government and policymakers are committed to 
developing comprehensive e-agricultural 
strategies. In many countries, infrastructure is being developed to speed up the use of  ICTs to improve livelihoods and advance national and cross-regional development (Waddock et al., 2015; Dentoni et al., 2012). Furthermore, a number of  
countries have advanced the implementation of  
ICT applications by building policies and 
infrastructure. Some examples of  such countries are Côte d’Ivoire, Jamaica, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda and Suriname. In Trinidad and Tobago, farmers use ICTs such as mobile phone 
applications to transform their agricultural 
activities and business transactions. As e-extension services, mobile phone applications that focus on weather, price sourcing at markets, and knowledge and information sharing, among others, enable 
farmers to make informed daily decisions. Maasai 
cattle businesses, for example, are thriving by using the market and weather information they receive via their mobile phones as it enables them to move to a specific traditional market in 
Maasailand, which covers part of  Kenya and 
Tanzania, for business transactions (Msuya and Annake, 2013). Similar activities are carried out throughout many rural and disadvantaged settings across developing economies. 
However, more needs to be done in the area of  
ICT4Ag not only to improve existing agricultural value chains, but also to scale up agriculture-related businesses (Latesteijn and Rabbinge, 
2012). This is so because agriculture in 
developing economies, and more specifically within many ACP countries, has received less attention – in terms of  funding and investment 4
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
– when compared to other sectors such as 
education and health (Saravanan, 2010). This 
chapter therefore seeks to document evidence of  
the potential and possible areas that could be of  interest to investors (CTA, 2016; 2013). Awuor et al. (2016) identified the potential role ICTs can 
play in improving, as well as investing in 
agriculture in Kenya to include the following;
• Increasingly ‘precise’ applications and tools – ICT and digital signatures or labels of various types will be 
used to track products from producer to consumer, to monitor local soil, weather and market condition; to tailor data and information services to the demands of a specific audience or individuals. Applications will 
come in many shapes and sizes, to suit even the most specialized needs.
• Increasingly ‘acceptable’ data and information – Vast quantities of public data and information held by 
institutions and individuals will become visible and re-usable at the click of a device. More intermediary 
skills and applications will be needed to help harvest, make sense of, and add value to these layers of 
data and information.
• Increasingly ‘diverse’ set of applications available across digital clouds – The digital ‘identities’ of scientists 
and their collaborators will give them access to a wide range of online tools and applications, accessible 
from any location and across different devices, enabling collaborations across boundaries as never before. Local firewalls and server configurations conditions will not restrict global sharing.
• Increasingly ‘inter-connected’ tools and knowledge bases – Different communities and their knowledge will be able to connect and share with each other, and along the research cycle and across disciplines, including people with different engagement in science such as farmers, traders, politicians among others. 
A whole new breed of products and services will emerge to inter-connect and re-present diverse knowledge.
Source: Awuor et al., 2016, pp. 79. 
The above give credence to the potential of  
knowledge and information sharing that will define the landscape in the use of  ICTs to advance agriculture development in Kenya in 
particular, as well as related developing countries 
that share more agrarian economic traits with Kenya. Furthermore, Caribbean countries such as Barbados, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, as well as Guyana have developed ICT-related 
policies, tools and national connectivity 
infrastructure that guide the agriculture sector to take up ICT4Ag to enhance their activities at various levels of  development (CTA, 2014). 
The introduction of  ICT4Ag products and 
services has seen some level of  impact investments within ICT4Ag fields. For example, impact investors have invested in applications that help farmers compare prices from diverse 
local and regional markets on their mobile phones, 
for which the farmers pay a small fee. These serve as a good starting point to look at the potential areas, as well as specific sectors of  agricultural 
value chains that will be viable areas for 
entrepreneurs and investors to take advantage of.
There is no doubt in the key role ICT is playing in 
transforming the entire agricultural value chain. 
The future holds great promise for the impact 
ICTs will continue to contribute to agricultural 
transformation as their potential is further 
harnessed. Whilst this chapter tries to document the main achievements, as well as success stories 
as evidence of  ICT4Ag use, the chapter further categorises thematic areas of  concern, as well as direct benefits recorded in the field. Selected 
country and area-specific case studies are 
highlighted by looking at commodity value chains that have improved due to the introduction of  ICT4Ag tools and business models. 
The task
This chapter highlights the outputs, outcomes, impact, as well as general evidence that has emerged from the development, introduction, use and adoption of  ICTs for agriculture-related 
tools with the vision to enhance agriculture-
based activities globally , and specifically within ACP countries. 
The method
A value chain analysis and modified PESTEL approach were used to collect, analyse and present the results for this chapter. The chapter highlights changes that have emerged due to the introduction of  ICT4Ag initiatives and 
businesses across developing economies. The 
chapter further looks at how these changes have enhanced the delivery of  extension services and market and weather information to farmers, and how they have improved the governance of  
agricultural value chains. 5
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
Specific case studies and interventions mainly 
from Asia and ACP countries are the units of  
analyses. The rationale behind exploring these 
case studies is to identify the synergies and 
variations that might exist in the delivery of  ICT4Ag initiatives and business models that deliver similar services, such as the provision of  weather/market information. Findings of  the 
reviewed literature have been grouped by region 
and categorised under sub-themes of  the services provided by ICT4Ag initiatives and providers. Furthermore, extensive desk research was carried out to reconcile data found in both scientific and policy documents, as well as grey literature. This approach helps to inform the potential investors, practitioners and general audience of  this 
chapter on the roles, impacts, effects and 
activities of  ICT4Ag in ACP countries in particular. A mixed method questionnaire was developed by 
the team to collect quantitative and qualitative 
data to support the research question. Phone and 
Skype interviews with experts, practitioners and 
beneficiaries from the ICT4Ag sector were conducted to provide further insights.  
Data analysis
A PESTEL analysis (Fahey and Narayanan, 1986) was used to present the results of  this chapter. PESTEL is an analytical tool that is used by organisations to provide diverse perspectives on the environment in which they are working. This chapter adopts the PESTEL framework to document evidence of  ICT4Ag in 
the current market, as well as to assess its 
viability for potential investment. 
The following are important considerations used to conduct such an analysis:
• What is the political situation of the country and how does it affect the industry?
• What are the prevalent economic factors?
• How much importance does culture have in the market and what are its determinants?
• What technological innovations are likely to emerge and affect the market structure?
• Are there any current legislations that regulate the industry or can there be any change in the legislations 
for the industry?
• What are the environmental concerns for the industry?
(Source: http://pestleanalysis.com/what-is-pestle-analysis/ , 2016)6
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
Table 1: PESTEL analysis of ICT4Ag in developing countries 
Political Political factors determine the extent to which government and political policies and 
procedures affect and influence divergent industries. as well as the economy of a given state, region, country and/or continent. Policies related to taxes, trade, fiscal, infrastructure, 
budget, and related others may affect the business environment. 
As an example, policies related to ICT4Ag are likely to influence the ease or otherwise of 
doing business or investment in the agricultural sector. 
Economic Economic factors include determinants that directly and indirectly influence as well as impact the economic performance of businesses and organisations. Issues related to budget, 
inflation, Foreign Direct Investment, interest rates and foreign exchange rates influence 
investors’ willingness to do business in particular countries and regions. How businesses price their products and services is influenced by economic issues that prevail in developing and emerging economies. 
Economic issues of a country or region are likely to serve as an incentive or disincentive for 
investment in ICT4Ag, especially in developing economies where such business models and initiatives are needed. 
Social The social environment of a target market is said to influence investment drive. Social issues such as cultural trends, population and demographic balance, and behaviour and trends of new business and venture acceptance, are likely to influence the decision to invest in a country, region or continent. This holds for ICT4Ag investment as well. 
Technological Innovation in technology, ease of the design, and use and adoption of the technologies – in this case ICT4Ag – are likely to influence the dissemination, as well as investment in such businesses and ventures. This is further critical for ICT4Ag which mainly relies upon 
technological inputs and gadgets to thrive as a business. 
Environmental To some extent, the surrounding environment of business ventures influences the 
sustainability and viability of the products and services provided. Factors such as climate, weather, geography, environmental variability, topography of land and country, as well as 
flora and fauna can influence the ease or otherwise in ICT4Ag investment. 
Legal Laws of a country, continent and regional affiliations, as well as membership of 
international bodies, such as the United Nations, African Union and the Asian Development 
Bank, are likely to influence certain cross border investment. International corporate 
organisations may like to keep as many universal legal frameworks and regulations across their investments as possible, across geographical spaces. Similarly, investment friendly legal frameworks of countries may influence investments in ICT4Ag. 
Extensive literature reviews to look at the broad 
picture of  the research questions were done on grey and secondary/anecdotal information available 
online. This was compared with other case study 
materials sourced from related organisations and institutions such as the African Development Bank, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), the Technical Centre for Agricultural and 
Rural Cooperation (CTA), Dissemination of  New 
Agriculture Technologies in Africa (DONATA), the Caribbean Agriculture Research and Development Institute, the Rural Agriculture Development Authority (RADA) in Jamaica, the 
Asian Development Bank, the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of  the United Nations (FAO), and the World Bank Group, among others. Results
Evidence of ICT4Ag in  
developing economies
Many ICT4Ag initiatives and business models focus on three thematic areas within the agricultural value chain: (1) agronomic and extension issues; (2) natural and climatic issues; 
and (3) market and business issues. However, in 
the first two decades of  their inception, the ICT tools and applications developed were initially influenced by ‘top-down’ thinking in the areas of  design, experimentation and implementation, as 
well as review and evaluation. Therefore, in the 7
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
absence of  ‘bottom-up’ input from target users, 
these ICTs have been technically challenged to solve the problems they were meant to address. 
In the last decade, however, many competitions and 
investment drives have been introduced as a way to psyche youthful participation and entrepreneurial investment, in order to sustain the many initiatives 
and start-ups that are ongoing within ICT4Ag 
fields  (London, 2015; Dentoni, 2012). 
Whilst impact investors and start-ups/
incubations have seen a level of  increase, in part, 
due to the implementation of  talent competitions 
such as CTA ’s AgriHack and hackathons, it is evident that a lot more effort is needed to scale-up these initiatives and turn them into real businesses that can become self-sustaining 
(London, 2015; Dentoni, 2012). 
PESTEL analysis on evidence  
of ICT4Ag use in developing 
economies
This section looks at how ICT4Ag has 
penetrated not only the world’s agricultural value 
chain, but also how various governance 
structures across ACP countries have created 
opportunities that could be of  interest to 
investors as well as entrepreneurs. The case studies highlighted exhibit how political, social, economic, environmental, legal and technological issues influence ICT4Ag successes.  Political 
Various national governments have embraced, enacted and given consent to many ICT4Ag policies and initiatives. Governments have various ICT4Ag policies and initiatives that have 
been embraced by donors, not-for-profit 
organisations and non-governmental organisations (NGOs), as well as business start-ups. 
Ghana 
The Ghanaian Government worked on its ICT for Accelerated Development Policy (ICT4D, 2003) with development partners and prioritised the expansion of  infrastructure such as fibre 
optics, communication busts (physical structures 
used by Telcos to transmit signals to its target clients/communities) and satellites to enhance ICT development as an avenue to entice private sector investment. 
The aim at the time in 2003 was to woo 
investment, as well as donor-driven support to create employment for Ghana’s productive labour force. Specifically , the policy document 
stated that “Ghana’s development process can be 
accelerated through the development, deployment and exploitation of  ICTs within the economy and society” (ICT4D, 2003, pp. 8). 
In the context of  infrastructural and agricultural 
development and production, as well as market access, the policy document had the following as its core vision:Figure 1: Conceptual model on evidence of ICT4Ag in developing economies (modified from 
Nuer, 2015)Agronomic/extension issues Natural/climatic issues Business/market issues 
ICT4Ag interventions/investments 
Projects/start-ups
Business investments 8
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
The strategies
• Modernise and expand Ghana’s information and communication infrastructure and services to improve 
universal access and quality of services
• Expand the physical infrastructure of Ghana, including those of power and transport
• Promote the development and deployment of basic and broadband and multi-platform communications infrastructure to facilitate public access to information and services 
• Put in place special ICT promotion packages, policy instruments and incentives to facilitate the expansion of the information and communications infrastructure 
• Employ science and technology in ensuring the supply of sustainable, affordable, safe and reliable energy
• Develop human resources to support the deployment and rehabilitation of modern and state-of-the art ICT 
infrastructure
• Promote research and development (R&D) programmes relating to alternative energy sources such as solar 
energy, biomass, nuclear, wind and other renewable energy sources to supplement the current traditional 
energy sources
Source: Ghana’s ICT4D Policy Paper, 2003, pp 63.
The Government of  Ghana has developed a four 
tier implementation plan related to ICT4D. The country’s mission is to carry out a complete overhaul to improve the ICT sector, as well as 
the use of  ICTs in all aspects of  its national and socio-economic development agenda (including 
the agriculture sector) for the period 2003 and 2022. The last two tiers of  the policy document are presented as follows:
The 4th Rolling ICT4AD Plan [2015-2018]
Goal: To further enhance and strengthen the production base of the economy to accelerate development and 
growth towards achieving an information-rich knowledge-based society and economy.
Priority policy areas of focus
• Developing an export-oriented ICT product and services industry
• Modernization of agriculture and the development of an agro-business industry
• Developing a globally competitive value-added services sector
• R&D and scientific and industrial research capacity development 
• Promoting foreign and local direct investment drive in ICTs
Strategic focus of the plan
Laying more emphasis on the production, development and delivery of ICT products and services and less emphasis on ICT deployment and exploitation. 
The 5th Rolling ICT4AD Plan [2019-2022]
Goal: To facilitate the process of sustaining economic development and growth towards improving national prosperity and global competitiveness. 
 Priority policy areas of focus
• Developing an export-oriented ICT product and services industry
• Developing a globally competitive value-added services sector
• R&D and scientific and industrial research capacity development 
• Promoting foreign and local direct investment drive in ICTs
Source: Ghana’s ICT4D Policy Paper, 2003, pp 819
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
The above policy documents created an enabling 
environment that has seen many donor-driven 
interventions, as well as ICT4Ag start-ups that 
have impacted the sector in Ghana. The rise of  
initiatives and start-ups, such as Farmerline and Esoko – who both have a diverse range of  local and international partners – are evidence of  how the initiation of  these policy frameworks and 
strategies have created the right environment for 
investors, entrepreneurs and hackathons to invest in ICT4Ag-related products and services. 
Rwanda 
In the case of  Rwanda, its National ICT Strategy and Plan (NICI, 2015), which has the ultimate goal of  creating ‘a knowledge-based economy’, supports identified trends of  national interests in fields including mobile application 
developments, outsourcing of  data management 
and cyber security mechanisms. This is to ensure that businesses and the country at large thrive on the use of  ICT-related tools, products and services by the year 2020 (NICI, 2015; Bryan 
Harrison, 2012). Though not directly mentioned 
as a core theme, ICT4Ag initiatives are spearheaded within the facilitation of  ICT infrastructure development, i.e. within the establishment of  legal, regulatory and 
institutional provisions and standards; through 
the deployment and spread of  ICTs in communities and the development and facilitation of  the private sector (NICI, 2015, pp. 15). ICT development, as well as the initiation 
of  policies by the government to enhance ICT 
development, have served as incentives for the country to invest in ICT-related business. Rwanda has become the most sought after place to invest in ICT business, including ICT4Ag, which is sanctioned by the Ministry of  Trade 
and Commerce, the Ministry of  Agriculture and 
the Ministry of  Finance. The government has created an enabling environment for Esoko in the provision of  incentives such as tax reliefs and policies for both the company , agriculture related 
actors, and communities. Community ICT 
centres and logistics have been established in many provinces of  the country . Community members, which include farmers, therefore have 
access to information for their activities (NICI, 
2015, pp. 38; NICI, 2010). 
Rwanda has further contextualised its ICT4Ag 
policy document by commissioning its National 
ICT4RAg (R standing for Rwanda) Strategy 
2016-2020 entitled eTransforming Agriculture in Rwanda 2016-2020. Positioned and implemented by the Ministry of  Agriculture and Animal Resources, the policy document seeks to use ICT4D tools and products to transform and improve agriculture development, its marketing, 
as well as the creation of  an enabling 
environment for agriculture to be seen as a business, and also attract investors to venture into the field. In summary , the policy document’s vision for 2020 identifies six interwoven pillars, 
including good governance and an efficient state, 
skilled human capital, a vibrant private sector, world-class physical infrastructure and modern agriculture and livestock, all geared towards national, regional and global markets (ICT4RAg Strategic Plan, 2016, pp. 8).
Tanzania
The national agriculture policy 2013, which was implemented by the then Ministry of  Agriculture and Cooperative in Tanzania and evolved from the national information technology policy of  
2003, gives credence to the importance placed by 
the national government on ICT4Ag. The policy document gives tax leverages and provides other incentives, such as the building of  community information centres with implementing partners 
that seek to enhance the use, adoption and 
optimisation of  ICT4Ag products and services to improve livelihoods in the country . 
Caribbean
Caribbean countries such as Dominica, Grenada and St. Kitts and Nevis have recorded significant improvement in the 2016 ICT Development Index presented by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), which 
monitors and records ICT/telecommunication activities across the world. 
Economic
Many mobile applications that look at gathering information along agribusiness marketing chains to help with price negotiations, weather updates and warehousing (Esoko, Farmerline, M-Pesa, 
etc.) have enjoyed government support in the last 
decade. Tax incentives and tax holidays have been given to many start-ups, investments and innovative business models that use ICTs to improve agriculture development across 
developing economies (CTA, Pacific Agriculture 
Policy Project (PAPP), FAO, the World Bank). Public-private partnership (PPP) initiatives have been further launched by various governments across developing economies in the last five years. 
Bangladesh, Ghana, Jamaica, Kenya, Rwanda, 
South Africa, Tanzania and Trinidad and Tobago, are among the countries that have documented PPP arrangements in their national 10
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
development plans, as well as tax incentives and 
holidays for would-be investors venturing into ICT4D businesses in the so called ‘vision 2020’-related development plans for these countries. 
Economic incentives to encourage investment in 
ICT4Ag initiatives and business models have become prevalent on many platforms across many developing countries. National 
organisations such as RADA-Jamaica and PAPP 
have initiated hackathons and projects on a piloted basis; scale-up incentives are on-going with technical and financial support provided by 
international partners such CTA and the EU. 
National economic teams implementing ICT-
related policies have included experts such as designers and implementers of  start-ups and 
businesses, from companies such as M-Pesa and 
Esoko, among others. 
The policy framework of  PAPP , initiated by 
development partners and Pacific countries, has 
embedded in its value chain analysis the need to 
integrate PPPs into initiatives that focus on agricultural development. Whilst this is laudable and already well integrated in many ICT4Ag initiatives, the missing link seems to be the delinking of  entrepreneurs and direct business 
investors to turn these initiatives into potentially 
viable businesses (London, 2015; Dentoni et al., 2012; PAPP and CTA, 2016). This seems to have been addressed with the inclusion of  entrepreneurs in these ICT4Ag initiatives and 
highly advocated investment drives, as well as 
through resolutions made at the 2016 Caribbean Week of  Agriculture (CWA) that concentrated on the theme ‘Investing in food and agriculture’. The regional gathering saw all countries that 
form the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) 
pledging to ensure they will provide the necessary economic incentives to woo investors into the agriculture sector, which employs about 80% of  their population as peasant farmers. 
Many developing economies have, at various 
levels, initiated as well as instituted infrastructural development agendas to enhance ICT4Ag investments. Whilst many countries have got to 
the level of  scaling up and sustaining an 
ICT4Ag-related economy , it behoves investors 
and entrepreneurs to take advantage of  the 
created infrastructure such as communication busts, satellites, and offices and road constructions across these countries to venture into businesses that will bring them higher return on investment (ROI). Such investments will also potentially open up the currently agrarian economies that rely upon traditional extension services and agricultural production models. 
Social 
The adoption of  ICT tools means that actors 
across the spectrum of  society can use such 
gadgets to advance and improve their livelihood 
activities. This has been seen with the 
penetration and use of  mobile phones and 
applications to reach out to targeted clients and audiences. The agriculture sector has not been left out in the transition towards mobile 
technology use and related gadgets. Farmers and 
extension staff have been empowered (directly and indirectly) to take advantage of  the wave of  ICT tools that are likely to enhance the way businesses are run at the community level. 
Notable organisations spearheading these 
trainings include FAO, CTA, World Bank, FARA, RADA, DONATA and PAPP . 
ICT4Ag ‘spaces’ to advance training, 
development and use of  ICT4Ag-related 
activities have been created online and at the community level by service providers and NGOs that operate in traditional and neo-agrarian settings in developing economies, such as the 
GRAMEEN Foundation and the MasterCard 
Foundation. The following are case studies that support ICT4Ag initiatives that have focused on providing solutions to societal needs across developing economies. 
Ensibuuko-Uganda
Ensibuuko is a ‘Software-as-a-Service’ (SaaS) provider that aligns its incentives and services to the needs of  microfinance institutions and 
savings groups services – such as the provision of  
credit to the smallholders – across regions and countries. Basic needs identified include provision of  credit facilities to smallholders, as well as provision of  financial services and linkages to local financial institutions. The 
service provider developed a mobile and web 
application in 2015/2016, which enables cooperatives of  smallholder and rural farmers to mobilise savings, and receive and disburse loans. The service provider had a financial forecast of  
€293,600 for 2016 and €490,000 for the period 
2017.
The company provides mainly microfinance 
management systems and only collects savings, 
loan and repayment information from farmers. 
A summary of  areas of  intervention and 11
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
investment by Ensibuuko is summarised in 
Appendices 1 and 2. 
FarmDrive-Kenya
FarmDrive connects financial institutions, 
insurance companies and smallholder farmers through mobile phones to access loans and related financial and insurance services. Smallholder loan 
acquisitions are tied to the crops, land size and 
season under which the crop has been cultivated. The company , through the use of  its software application, ensures that the information gathered, such as plant growth, harvest time/period and the sale of  crops, falls within the instalment plans of  the loans acquired by the farmers. A weather insurance package further 
helps to provide security for both the loan lender 
and recipient. Payments and defaults are tracked by the company via the FarmDrive mobile app, which is monitored by the stakeholders. 
Case study iCow-Kenya 
In Kenya, a mobile phone application called iCow has been developed by Green Dreams TECH. The application includes a cow calendar 
which dairy farmers use to register  their cows by 
gestation date, and then receive text messages from the iCow app to alert them when to carry out artificial insemination. About 128,000 Kenyan dairy farmers have benefited from the 
application. Farmers have seen an increase in 
milk production by 2-3 l a day , and an increase in their incomes of  €25 per month. 
Agrinfo-Tanzania
Agrinfo is an ICT-based online database that uses GIS to record farmland ownership in Tanzania. Agrinfo has partnered with farmer cooperatives, financial institutions, and input and 
output suppliers to access information for the 
database. The database service provider, also a start-up, stores information such as farm area size and areas suitable for agriculture investments, as well as a platform for mapping 
farms using GPS software on mobile phones. 
The start-up serves as a bridge in bringing financial institutions and potential investors to areas where they could invest in farm-related 
businesses in rural Tanzania. 
Pacific-Caribbean Countries
 
mFisheries West Indies 
Fishing communities are also benefiting from 
ICTs. An example is the mFisheries mobile and web application developed by the University of  the West Indies. In Trinidad, this application is used to improve the efficiency and welfare of  
small-scale fishers. By using a smart phone, 
fishermen are able to use the app to receive weather reports, navigational tools, training tips and first aid and emergency boat repairs. The application can also be used to find the fish 
prices from different markets. 
Technological 
The introduction of  many ICT-related tools 
means that there is good market for ICT4Ag, not only along the agricultural value chain, but within the entire ICT4D arena. The introduction of  competitions such as hackathons, bootcamps, and impact hubs has incentivised youths to create new technology applications. As 
an example, the Meltwater Entrepreneurial 
School of  Technology currently trains young graduates across sub-Saharan Africa to design and pitch innovative initiatives after a year of  
training. The rise of  partnerships within the 
technology arena further serves as a potential incentive for investors and entrepreneurs looking to get into the area. The following case studies support technological investments and initiatives 
that show the need for potential investors and 
entrepreneurs to invest in ICT4Ag.
The Asian Development Bank case 
studies and examples
The Asian Development Bank has initiated 
many ICT4Ag projects that aim to increase yield and production, as well as market access and post-harvest enhancement. The bank has 
targeted a water resources information system in 
Viet Nam that has a funding portfolio of  €588,000. The bank also supports the implementation of  the Greater Mekong sub-region’s Core Agriculture Support Program 
(Phase 2) that has composite funding from 
Swedish and Nordic funding sources, running into the millions of  dollars. Another area of  the bank’s funding and investment is in the application of  remote sensing technologies in 
river basin management for countries like 
Bangladesh, Philippines and Viet Nam. 
Case study: Vodafone Connected  
Farmers in India 
Vodafone Connected Farmers is expected to provide an average improved income of  about €105 for over 60% of  smallholder farmers in India by 2020. This case study focuses on how 
mobile technologies can impact Indian farmers 
who live on under US$2 a day . Specifically , the foundation and its partners explored how mobile solutions are helping to improve agricultural 12
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
productivity and efficiency , and rural livelihoods 
in emerging markets across the developing world 
(cf. India, Kenya, Tanzania and Turkey). 
Findings from the explored areas have been 
contextualised to suit the agricultural production needs of  farming families in India. With international development organisation Accenture as its main partner, the Vodafone 
Foundation has earmarked six services that the telephone sector can provide to help improve livelihoods, as well as create markets for farmers 
and encourage investment in India. A projected 
turnover of  just under €5.5 billion is forecasted 
for farmers who are likely to adopt and use services to be provided by the Vodafone Foundation. A summary of  the six main services is presented below. 
Type of service Case study
Information 
servicesProvides tailored agricultural information over mobile phones to the farming communitiesReuters Market Light
Organisation: Reuters Market Light
Location: India 
Receipt services Provides transparency in daily commodity 
supply chains through use of mobile 
registration services and receiptsNdumberi Dairy receipting services
Organisations: Ndumberi Dairy Farmers 
Co-operative Society, Vodafone, USAID, Technoserve, Safaricom
Location: Kenya
Payments and 
loans Integrates farmers into a registered database and enables access to loans and payments via mobile moneyMultiflower payment and loans services
Organisations: Multiflower, Vodafone, 
USAID, Technoserve, Vodacom
Location: Tanzania
Field audit Uses tablets to improve efficiency for 
auditors monitoring quality, sustainability and certification requirement ECOTAB
Organisations: Unilever, Vodafone, 
Rainforest Alliance
Location: Turkey
Enabling access 
to local markets Enables small-scale producers to transact with local co-operatives through a buy/sell 
platform with integrated mobile payments. RUDI Sandesha Vyavhar
Organisations: Self-Empowered Women’s 
Association, Vodafone Foundation, Cherie Blair Foundation for Women
Location: India 
Smartphone-
enabled services Provides a combination of smartphone-enabled information services, with mobile 
payments, loans, insurance and receipting 
and a virtual marketplace Vodafone Farmers Club
Organisation: Vodafone Turkey
Location: Turkey 
Source: Vodafone foundation, 2015 
Whilst a lot of  the above-mentioned investment 
started from impact investment and social entrepreneurship systemic thinking, new businesses with profit as their sole motive have emerged in Asia. Examples include initiatives spearheaded by the Yunus Foundation in Bangladesh, Pakistan and Viet Nam, as further described below. 13
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
The Yunus Foundation example 
The Yunus foundation through its Social 
Business Fund Mumbai has an estimated €2 million from co-financiers to build and support many social ventures that have society and community development as core to their vision 
in India. The Yunus centre, and related 
networks, rely on ICT4D tools to provide various forms of  microinsurance and microfinance products and facilities to many smallholder farmers within and outside of  rural and peri-
urban communities. The combination of  PPPs 
and foundations venturing into ICT4Ag in South-East Asia is expected to reach about 20% of  the entire business portfolio in the next two decades (Asian Development Bank, 2016; Yunus Centre for Social Business Mumbai, 2016). This notwithstanding, it is interesting to note that there is a lot of  room for investment in the Asian 
market. The prevailing challenges for 
investments continue to relate to extreme weather events due to climate change, such as drought and flooding, as well as institutional and cultural issues such as the traditional land tenure 
system (Chapter 3 of  this work conveys some of  
these challenges).  
Whilst ICT4Ag activities are supported by local 
and foreign agencies and bodies, international 
impact investors – through diverse networks such 
as the Global Impact Investing Network – have identified opportunities created in Asia and are doing business in countries such as Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. 
Private investment in ICT4Ag in Asia is 
estimated to be in the range of  €84 million (FAO, 2016; Asian Development Bank, 2016).
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Kenya, Ghana, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda are among the leading countries in sub-Saharan Africa that have made advancements in ICT4Ag in Africa. Rwanda, for example, was the second 
country in Africa after Namibia to introduce 4G 
high speed broadband. This became possible because the country got involved in ICTs and launched a network that provided high speed broadband access to 95% of  Rwanda within 
three years (Lwakabamba, 2005). Due to this 
advancement, the country has been able to progress towards its 2020 vision of  developing a path that seeks to transform the country into a middle income ICT-based economy . The ICT 
network launched led to a rapid growth of  
Rwanda’s mobile phone usage from 6 to 60% in just five years, which ultimately lead to transformation of  the agricultural sector. Farmers have been able to use ICT-related applications such as mobile phones to access financial and climatic information, thus 
enhancing their production functions 
(Harrison, 2005). 
Other countries such as Cameroon, Ghana, 
Niger, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania and 
Uganda have their own telecommunication 
companies, start-ups and international collaboration, including with CTA, the MasterCard Foundation and the African Development Bank, who have initiated technology-based activities and investment. Kenya, as an example, has witnessed an agriculture-related business boom due to the 
influx of  many agricultural web-based app 
initiatives coordinated by telecommunication and investment companies, such as Safaricom, Orange and the African Development Bank, and through the use of  mobile money app M-Pesa 
(CTA, 2016; Eldon, 2005). For example, to 
advance the use of  ICT4Ag in sub-Saharan Africa, Susan Oguya and Jamila Abass, the founders of  start-ups M-Farm and Akirachix, developed a mobile application for farmers in 
rural Kenya. Using the M-Farm app, farmers are 
able to predict their estimated production and yield based on the size of  their land. 
The Consultative Group to Assist  
the Poor (CGAP) case studies of  
mobile banking as e-financial  
services in Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda 
and Tanzania 
Kenya and Tanzania were among the first 
countries to witness the proliferation of  ICT4D tools and services in the mobile banking sector. A GCAP study between 2013 and 2015 found that 
the adult population with access to financial 
services, as well as inclusion in access to financial services due to the introduction mobile banking, stood at 65 and 50% for Kenya and Tanzania, respectively . In Ghana and Rwanda, 48 and 37% 
of  their adult populations have been reached 
since the introduction of  e-financial services in 2015 (CGAP , 2015). In Kenya and Tanzania, 28 and 21% of  the adult populations now have 
access to a bank account due to the introduction 
of  mobile banking, and Ghana and Rwanda have seen similar growth with 34 and 16% of  adults accessing a bank account. Kenya and Tanzania recorded 63 and 38% of  their adult 
populations owning a mobile money account; in 
Ghana and Rwanda, figures for the same stood at 20 and 23%, respectively . 14
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
The above figures show that ICT4D initiatives 
have great potential for investment. In Kenya in 
2015, the percentage of  urban and rural 
populations with access to mobile banking stood 
at 44 and 56%, respectively (GCAP , 2015). Tanzania recorded 45 and 55%, Rwanda had 39 and 61%, and Ghana recorded 60 and 40%, 
respectively . A FinScope study carried out 
between 2010 and 2015 in Ghana found that 
financial exclusion had almost halved to about 
43% due to the introduction of  mobile banking. 
Source: CGAP, 2015
Environment 
Environmental factors such as climatic issues continue to influence the use of  ICT tools in many developing economies. Poor mobile connectivity for instance is experienced when 
there is heavy rainfall. Interestingly , 
environmental factors also affect the use and sustainability of  many ICT4Ag initiatives embarked in the rural settings of  ACP countries, where 70% of  agricultural production is carried 
out. It is estimated that over 200 million 
small-scale farmers are affected by environmental factors including climate and soil-related issues that when tackled, can lead to about a 50% increase in production. Start-up companies have emerged to bring in solutions in 
the area of  weather forecast information, 
however, it is estimated that many farmers are currently not reached with such initiatives due to a low level of  investment. 
Sub-Saharan African examples
Esoko and FarmerLine are examples of  ICT4Ag 
companies that provide weather forecast 
information to farmers as well as climate 
mapping data, which includes information on 
agronomic conditions. Across countries like The Gambia, Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra-Leone 
and Uganda, data generated by the two companies is sold to farmers (at the below prices) and not-for-profit organisations that engage in 
agriculture-related interventions. 
Farmerline is a software developing company 
with ‘a social soul’ that provides voice content services to farmers in their local languages. The 
company provides weather forecast, good 
agronomic and marketing tips to farmers. For example, a weather forecast subscription costs $3 per season per farmer (6 months).
An impact study conducted by Farmerline has 
shown that a 50% increase in farmers’ income is achieved when relevant information, such as weather forecasts and the price of  agricultural 
products, is provided to them. As of  May 2016, 
about 200,000 farmers are benefiting from the solution provided by the company in the form of  data and information. The company intends to reach about 1,000,000 farmers by 2020 in order 
to achieve its targeted impact of  curbing negative 
shocks to farmers due to environmental-related 
challenges, such as climatic variability , across the 
African continent. Access Strand in FII 2015 vs FinScope 2010
 Bank    Non-bank formal    Informal only    Excluded2015 25% 17% 22% 36%
2010 44% 15% 7% 34%15
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
Legal
Many governments have sanctioned and 
approved various policies and legal frameworks that support the use of  ICT tools to enhance agriculture. International organisations such as CTA, FAO-ITU and the World Bank have 
initiated legal frameworks that many developing 
countries currently subscribe to (CTA-ITU, 2014). The Harmonization of  ICT Policies in Sub-Saharan Africa serves as an example of  related legal frameworks that cut across 
geographical boundaries. The policies within this 
framework complement national policies like Rwanda’s vision 2020, which aims to make ICTs one of  its main tools to advance its national development plans. 
The FAO/ITU/CTA example
The e-agriculture strategies developed by the above organisations have created an enabling policy environment for those countries 
subscribing to the framework. Furthermore, the 
framework document has created the desired outcomes in the  use of   ICT4Ag tools and products. This  has become a benchmark that many developing countries such as Bangladesh, 
Ghana, India, Jamaica and Kenya, among 
others, subscribe to. The e-agriculture framework  is gradually helping to harmonise local policy frameworks and policies of  national governments in the ease and use of  ICT4Ag 
tools, as well as to synchronise incentives to drive 
investment in the agriculture sectors of  their economies. 
In the last decade, the FAO/ITU/CTA 
framework (c.f. Appendix 4) has gradually 
become the core document and strategy that governments, development partners, NGOs and not-for-profits rely upon to initiate and implement their ICT4Ag policies and business 
models. The framework could become an 
important strategy in agriculture investment business models for investors and entrepreneurs to take advantage of, and invest their resources and core competencies in. Further, it is a 
document that can be used as a guide to scale-up 
ICT4Ag policies and project initiatives within 
the agriculture sector. 
Evidence from CARICOM 
CARICOM, an organisation of  15 Caribbean 
nations and dependencies, has imbibed many contexts of  e-agriculture strategies into national development plans. Political documents and strategies such as the Community Agriculture 
Policy , the Regional Food and Nutrition Security Policy , and the Agribusiness Strategic Plan have 
integrated ICT4Ag strategies such as e-extension and data banks that store and provide 
information to researchers, farmers, investors, 
policymakers and the international community 
(including the EU that has previously and 
continues to sponsor development policies with 
significant budgetary support to the community). 
Modern knowledge and information systems to 
improve decision making and encourage R&D, 
actor interactions and information sharing, have 
been set up in member states since 2013. The aim has been to help create an enabling environment whereby extension services, market access and information, and food and nutrition security issues are handled to improve agriculture production across the Caribbean community . 
A 2016 CWA – endorsed by all countries in the 
community – with the theme ‘Investing in food and agriculture’, has seen many strategies and enactment of  agriculture-related policies, shared by countries such as Belize, Guyana, Jamaica 
and Vanuatu. In the Caribbean community , over 
60% of  the productive labour force are subsistent farmers, representing opportunities for investment. 
A Council for Trade and Economic 
Development seminar was held in the Cayman Islands by representatives of  CARICOM in October 2016. The aim was to forge and develop further strategies, which included ICT4Ag 
incentives, to help woo investors and 
entrepreneurs into agriculture-related investments across food value chains in the Caribbean region.
Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa
The Eastern Africa Community , especially the so-called ‘Great Lakes Region’, as well as countries within the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, have initiated a 
‘vision 2050’ accelerated development plan that 
includes ICT4Ag as a major strategy to improve agricultural production, with PPP as one of  its core objectives. 
Kenya and Tanzania have included ICT4Ag in 
their national policies, and encourage innovative investment mechanisms to improve agricultural production. Kenya and Tanzania have great 
potential to act as significant export markets to 
Europe due to their proximity to seaports such as Mombasa and Dar-es-Salaam, and as such, have seen their governments initiate robust 16
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Evidence of the development and use of ICTs in agriculture for investment 
infrastructure developments and tax relief  
policies to serve as incentives for potential 
investors to take advantage of  this point. 
The creation of  an enabling policy environment 
aimed to woo investors to capitalise on products and services, such as ICT4Ag, to advance the national vision of  improving agricultural 
production. Investors needed to look at how best 
to take advantage of  the political environment for investment, whilst not contravening the state security of  governments. 
Other areas of ICT4D initiatives  
creating avenue for investment
Financial service provision to unbankable rural 
populations, and within informal economies, was 
a challenge until the introduction of  e-financial 
products and services by telecommunication 
organisations and related providers in the last decade (CGAP , 2015). Financial inclusion strategies such as the introduction of  mobile money services have seen evidence of  success as 
outlined below (CGAP , 2015).
Musoni mobile microfinance app 
example
This mobile application is a multipurpose device 
that uses multiple services and products to provide financial services to clients across Kenya. 
Loan officers do not have to have extensive 
knowledge in information technology . The devise computes as well as self-generates data and information on client performance in loan repayment, credit delivery and use. In 
collaboration with existing financial service 
providers, Musoni has integrated its services and expertise with known farmer and smallholder client service providers like M-Pesa, Airtel Money and Payway in Kenya and Zimbabwe, 
among others. The software application 
company currently has about 350,000 clients from 78 institutions across 14 countries. Their success led to the company winning the BBVA Financial Inclusive Special Award in 2016. 
Synergy
The introduction of, and investment by , the 
Asian Tigers in countries such as Bangladesh 
and Viet Nam aimed to combat the effects of  
climate impacts that affect agricultural 
production and environmental sustainability , 
such as flooding, typhoons, heavy rains, sea level rise and droughts. It is suggested that ICT4Ag initiatives have really improved production functions, and at the same time enhanced 
smallholder knowledge whilst improving their agricultural practices. Investments in Asia’s ICT4Ag initiatives to enhance and improve total 
production show that the region has a robust and holistic interest in creating an enabling environment for investors. This win-win approach is a great lure for investors within Asia 
and the western world. 
Sub-Saharan Africa has also seen investment in 
weather and other environmental-related fields. This paves the way for potential investors and 
entrepreneurs to harness their resources to 
venture into a market that is still young, but has the potential of  digitising agricultural production, as well as creating businesses, jobs and markets across the developing world. 
There are however some bottlenecks in the area 
of  solidifying ICT-related regulations, as well as 
creating an information and knowledge base as 
to where investors and entrepreneurs can invest. These bottlenecks which hover around the completion of  paper work, transportation of  bulk documents, manual filing, etc. are 
themselves opportunities for digital/ICT-related 
investment to improve efficacy . It is expected that the many ICT4Ag collaborations established will serve as added incentives to open the market for scale-ups, and enable agriculture-related 
businesses to thrive, as well as become self-
sustainable. Whilst the financial sector seems to enjoy massive investment drives, sectors including the provision of  ICT4Ag data, storage, processing and postharvest handling needs are in need of  such funding. Standout start-ups and 
hackathon winners such as Esoko, Farmerline, 
mFarm, as well as the introduction of  initiatives by governments and international donors, have set an example to entrepreneurs to venture into ICT4Ag investment. REFERENCES
17
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?References
Aina, L. O. (2012). The information 
environment of  agricultural stakeholders in 
Botswana. Information Development, 28(2), 149-159. doi: 10.1177/0266666911433117 
Aker, J. C., & Mbiti, I. M. (2010). Mobile phones 
and economic development in Africa. The Journal of  Economic Perspectives, 24(3), 207-232. 
Asenso-Okyere, K., & Mekonnen, D. A. (2012). 
The importance of  ICTs in the provision of  
information for improving agricultural 
productivity and rural incomes in Africa. African Human Development Report. UNDP Sponsored research Series. 
Bhatnagar, S. (2000). Social implications of  
information and communication technology in developing countries: Lessons from Asian success stories. The Electronic Journal of  
Information Systems in Developing 
Countries, 1.
Carden, F . (2009). Knowledge to policy: making 
the most of  development research: IDRC.
Crowley , J., & Ryan, M. (2013). Building a better 
international NGO: greater than the sum of  the parts? : Kumarian Press.
CTA Working Paper 16/12 | October 2016. 
Drone Governance: A Scan of  Policies, Laws and Regulations Governing the Use of  Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in 79 ACP Countries.
David, R. J., Dalohoun, D. N., Drammeh, E., 
Van Mele, P ., & Bah, S. (2011). The Gambia: Capturing the media African Seed Enterprises: Sowing the Seeds of  Food Security (pp. 109-132): CABI Publishing.
Dentoni, D., Hospes, O. & Ross, R. B. (2012). 
Managing Wicked Problems in Agribusiness: The Role of  Multi-Stakeholder Engagements in Value Creation. International Food and 
Agribusiness Management Review Volume 
15, Special Issue B, 2012.
Duncombe, R., & Heeks, R. (2005). Information 
& Communication Technologies (ICTs), 
Poverty Reduction and Micro, Small & Medium-scale Enterprises (MSMEs). A 
framework for understanding ICT applications for MSMEs in developing countries.
Eldon, M. (2005). ICT in Kenya, where are we 
now. Regional e-governance programme: progress from Tanzania. Paper presented at the 2nd EAC Regional Consultative Workshop.
Fahey , L & Narayanan, V .K. (1986). 
Macroenviromental Analysis for Strategic Management (The West Series in Strategic Management). St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Company .
The Ghana ICT for Accelerated Development 
(ICT4AD) Policy . (2003). The Republic of  Ghana. 
Harrison, B. (2005). Information and 
communication technology policy in Rwanda. Case Study . Retrieved on December, 20(2014), 35-57.
Howard, P . N. & Hussain, M. M. (2011). The 
role of  digital media. Journal of  democracy , 22(3), 35-48.
Isabirye, N., Flowerday , S. V ., Nanavati, A., & 
von Solms, R. (2015). Building technology 
trust in a rural agricultural e-marketplace: A 
user requirements perspective. Electronic Journal of  Information Systems in Developing Countries, 70(1), 1-20. 
Kaka, E. J., & Launi, S. (2014). A review of  the 
strategies adopted by some poor nations to alleviate poverty . Mediterranean Journal of  Social Sciences, 5(27), 318-324. doi: 10.5901/mjss.2014.v5n27p318
Kiiza, B., & Pederson, G. (2012). ICT-based 
market information and adoption of  agricultural seed technologies: Insights from Uganda. Telecommunications Policy , 36(4), 253-259.
Latesteijn, H.C. van & Rabbinge, R. (2012). 
Wicked Problems in Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security , the TransForum Experience. International Food and REFERENCES
18
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Agribusiness Management Review Volume 
15, Special Issue B, 2012.
Lwakabamba, S. (2005). The development of  
ICTs in Rwanda: pioneering experiences. At 
the crossroads: ICT policy making in East Africa, 213-224.
Mabe, L., & Oladele, O. (2012). Use of  
Information Communication Technologies tools among Extension officers in the North-West Province, South Africa. Life Science Journal, 9(4). 
Msuya, J & Annake, A.S. (2013). The role of  
mobile phones in facilitating communication 
among the Maasai pastoralists in Tanzania. 
Africa Journal Online. Vol 25, No 1 ( Accessed on Ghana Library Journal).
Munyua, H. (2007). ICTs and small-scale 
agriculture in Africa: a scoping study .
Rahman, M., Panda, S., & Tofazzal Islam, M. 
(2012). Technology developments in 
Bangladesh and higher education through 
ODL Effectively Implementing Information Communication Technology in Higher Education in the Asia-Pacific Region (pp. 273-293): Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Saravanan, R. (2010). ICTs for agricultural 
extension: Global experiments, innovations and experiences: New India Publishing.Tong, T . M., Asare, J., Rwenyagila, E. R., Anye, 
V ., Oyewole, O. K., Fashina, A. A., & 
Soboyejo, W . O. (2015). A Study of  factors 
that influence the adoption of  solar powered 
lanterns in a rural village in Kenya. Perspectives on Global Development and Technology , 14(4), 448-491. doi: 10.1163/15691497-12341356
Utulu, S. C. A. (2014). Mobile phone and 
development: Synthesis on new misuse perspective ICTs and the millennium development goals: A United Nations perspective (pp. 101-125): Springer US.
van Tulder, R.J.M. (2016). Solving wicked 
problems through partnerships. RSM Discovery - Management Knowledge, 28(4), 5–7. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1765/94708 
Wabwoba, F ., Wanyembi, G. W ., & Omuterema, 
S. (2012). Barriers to implementation of  green ICT in Kenya. International Journal of  Science and Technology , 2(12), 823-836. 
Waddock, S., Meszoely , G.M., Waddell, S. & 
Dentoni, D. (2015). ‘The complexity of  wicked problems in large scale change’, Journal of  Organizational Change Management, Vol. 28 Iss: 6, pp.993 – 1012. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/JOCM-08-2014-0146 
Online resources
London, T . (2009). Making Better Investments at 
the Base of  the Pyramid. https://hbr.
org/2009/05/making-better-investments-at-
the-base-of-the-pyramid (Accessed on 24th 
October, 2017)
Agrinfo, in Tanzania (https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=fFUVgKMhFEU ) (Accessed on 15th September, 2016)
http://ictforag.org/themes/ (Accessed on 20th 
October, 2016)
http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/10/high-tech-
high-yields-caribbean-farmers-reap-benefits-of-ict/ (Accessed on 21st October, 2016)http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/10/high-tech-
high-yields-caribbean-farmers-reap-benefits-of-ict/ (Accessed on 21st October, 2016)
http://caribbean.cepal.org/content/ict-
agriculture (Accessed on 21st October, 2016)
https://www.adb.org/sectors/ict/ict-in-key-sectors/
agriculture (Accessed on 21st October, 2016)
http://www.e-agriculture.org/content/cta-
working-pape-drone-governance-scan-policies-laws-and-regulations-governing-use-unmanned (Accessed on 24th October, 2016)
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5564e.pdf  (Accessed 
on 20th October, 2016)REFERENCES
19
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/
publications/multimedia/cgap/index.html 
(Accessed on on 12th December, 2016)
http://paei.wikidot.com/fahey-narayanan-
macroenvironmental-analysis (Accessed on 
12th December, 2016)
http://pestleanalysis.com/what-is-pestle-
analysis/ (Accessed on 12th December, 2016)
http://wayback.archive-it.
org/3908/20150511071503/http://ictupdate.cta.int/Feature-Articles/CARICOM-s-e-agriculture-strategies/(73)/1377178426 (Accessed on 28th 
December, 2016)
http://caricom.org/media-center/multimedia/
document-library/ (Accessed on 28th December, 2016). 
http://caricom.org/media-center/
communications/news-from-the-community/
caricoms-political-will-to-move-agriculture-forward-impresses-pacific-islands (Accessed 
on 28th December, 2016)
Regional Vision for Socio-Economic 
Transformation and Development. Arusha, 
Tanzania, February , 2016. http://www.eac.
int/sites/default/files/docs/eac_
vision_2050-_web.pdf  (Accessed on 28th December, 2016)
http://musonisystem.com/ (Accessed on 29th 
December, 2016)https://farmdrive.co.ke/ (Accessed on 29th 
December, 2016)
http://www.ensibuuko.com/ (Accessed on 29th 
December, 2016)
http://www.ensibuuko.com/docs/ensibuuko_
masterdeck.pdf  (Accessed on 29th December, 
2016)
http://www.agrinfo.co.tz/ (Accessed on 29th 
December, 2016)
http://socialbusinesspedia.com/design_labs/
projects (Accessed on 9th January , 2017)
The FAO-ITU E-agriculture Strategy Guide is 
available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5564e.
pdf  (Accessed on 30th December, 2016)
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/
Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf
The World Bank's ICT in Agriculture 
Sourcebook https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27526 
ICTs for agriculture: Making it happen (CTA 
2014) https://publications.cta.int/en/publications/publication/ICT075E/
ICTUpdate Magazine http://ictupdate.cta.int/ 
CTA ’s Strategic Plan (2016-2020) https://
publications.cta.int/media/publications/
downloads/1966_PDF .pdfAPPENDIx 1 
20
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Appendix 1 
Ensibuuko-Uganda Funding Strategy (2016-2017)
Current funding strategy is based on this plan.
Cost factor % age2016 annual 
budget (USD)2017 annual 
budget (USD)
Costs of technology and software 20% 70,000 112,000
Staff costs 30% 105,000 168,000
Client acquisition and retention costs 50% 175,000 280,000
Total 100% 350,000 560,000
How we will be financed 2016 2017 2018 2019
Self funding
Private investment
Grants
We made major investments in technology in 2014, we shall shift our financing towards activities to 
acquiring and maintain customers; including promotion, training and data migration. In this regard, we shall also build our HR capacity to meet our rate of growth. In 2014, we started generating revenue, we anticipate 
that in mid 2016, our revenue earning will start to offset some significant costs. We will however only be 
self-financed in 2018. So, we shall continue to access grants from like-minded partners and will open our investment window in 2016.APPENDIx 2 
21
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Appendix 2 
Ensibuuko Strategy and Solution
The solutionHarnessing the power of digital banking to increase delivery of financial service BoP market 
in Africa
Ensibuuko offers financial service providers the means to grow and scale rapidly and to reach underserved communities. Through a management software embedded with mobile money capabilities for Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs), we are helping SACCOs build operational efficiency, cut costs and to improve their reach. We are making it possible for banks to remotely link with and partner with SACCOs.
Intervention Outcomes
Management Information Software: We offer SACCOs an efficient and robust management software. The software is built to meet core-banking standards and has advanced data processing and reporting functionalities with an easy-to-use interface.• Improved efficiency and lower costs
• Quicker and better informed 
 
decision making
• Financial control and minimised  
risk loss
Mobile wallet: Our software comes with mobile money capabilities that is powered through a USSD platform accessible on any basic mobile phone. Members and clients of SACCOs can transact with and manage their account while enjoying added benefits of 
 
SMS features.• Higher liquidity
• More accessibility
• Improved customer satisfaction  
and loyalty
• Improved efficiency and  
reduced costs
Capacity building: We implement a curriculum on digital finance and mobile banking. The curriculum was developed using Human Centred Design methodologies and is interactive and practical. This training package develops the capacity of staff and clients at financial institutions to utilise digital solutions 
 
in banking.• Higher skills levels and know-how
• Higher uptake and usage
Cloud banking: We offer better connectivity for rural-based financial institutions while minimising their own investment in equipment. We provide shared space at our centralised servers on which users may work remotely using modems and router configured for our dedicated Access Point Network (APN). In areas with no 3G/4G network, our connection runs on Edge/GPRS network.• Better connectivity
• Seamless and great user experience
• Data security and tamper-proof
• Improved effeciency and lower costs
Impact: Our disruptive software solutions combined with an ecosystem of digital financial experts and an existing cloud infrastructure to allow connectivity in hard-to reach places, will enable easy and affordable access to financial services for people at the bottom of the pyramid.
Source: Ensibuuko 2015 Report 
APPENDIx 3 
22
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Appendix 3 
Framework for a national e-agriculture vision
Source: FAO• The  role of agriculture in national and more specifically rural 
development;
• The current and likely direction of agriculture, including challenges and opportunites;
• The structure and linkages of the agricultural system;
• The rational agricultural strategy, goals and priorities;
• National social and economic development goals and priorities; and
• The implications of e-agriculture.Strategic context:
Rationale for e-agriculture
• E-agriculture outcomes to meet agriculture goals and overcome challenges;
• Positive changes and impact on the livelihoods of people involved in 
the agriculture sector;
• Improve investment potential in agriculture sector;
• Reduce individual and institutional risks of the family community.E-agriculture vision:
Desired outcomes
• Leadership and governance;
• Legislaton, policy and compliance;
• Strategy and investment;
• Infrastructure;
• ICT services and applications;
• Standards and interoperability;
• Content, knowledge management and sharing;
• Workforce and capacity development.E-agriculture 
components:
Enabling environment23
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs  for agriculture
CHAPTER 2 
Potential for investment in ICTs  
for agriculture
Introduction
There are currently over 3.5 billion internet 
users globally , 2 billion of  whom are from 
developing countries. The use of  mobile devices 
has also increased globally from below 1 billion to over 7 billion in 2016 according to the International Telecommunication Bureau (ITU) 
(ITU, 2015). However, universal access to ICTs 
has not yet been achieved, especially in the rural areas of  developing countries. 
People living in rural areas still experience lower 
access to the internet than their urban counterparts. For instance, 3G internet access for rural areas is at 29%  compared to 89% for urban areas, globally . Household internet access 
in developing and least developing countries 
remains very low with only 34% and 7% of  households having access, respectively . This may be due to the cost of  internet services in these countries where prices are reportedly three times 
the global average. Between 2008 and 2011, the 
prices have stagnated and even increased slightly in least developed countries (ITU, 2015).
An affordable universal service is one in which 
the “cost of  average monthly usage is a small 
percentage of  monthly gross national income per 
capita” (Dymond et al., 2010). 
This chapter seeks to reveal areas within the field 
of  ICT4Ag that are suitable for further 
investment – with a specific focus on ‘for profit’ 
investment. 
Why ‘for profit’? 
The focus on ‘for profit’ investments has been informed by a number of  studies that have revealed that most ICTs in agricultural initiatives, when government and donor funded, do not become sustainable after the initial funding runs out. This observation was made as early as 2009 by Gakuru, Winters and Stepman 
in their inventory of  ICTs that provide 
information services to farmers. They observed that among other challenges, the end of  donor or government funding often led to the end of  the provision of  these ICT-related services to farmers.
More recently , a 2016 report by the Technical 
Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation 
(CTA) titled Lessons for Sustainability: Failing to scale ICT4Ag-enabled services , highlights the issue of  the 
lack of  viable business models for ICT4Ag applications. The report notes that most ICT4Ag 
developers are not very business minded and 
often do not consider the need to commercialise their solutions, or the ability of  users to pay for the services, particularly in government and donor-funded projects (Shepherd, 2016). 
This failure to scale and achieve sustainability 
can be attributed, in part, to the ‘free information’ model adopted by ICT4Ag developers in the development and provision of  
these services. As such, the consumers of  the 
services, mainly farmers and agricultural extension officers, have become accustomed to receiving free services over time and are unwilling to pay for them. It is therefore 
understandable that most private sector players 
have not been sufficiently attracted to the provision of  ICT4Ag services due to the lack of  business models with profit as the end goal. As such, this chapter – and book in general – seeks 
to address the lack of  ‘for profit’ investment in 
certain ICT4Ag areas by specifically revealing 
where such investment is possible.
The infographic below by FAO and ITU aptly 
summarises various ICTs presently available, as well as their applications in agriculture. 24
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
Figure 2: Uses of ICTs in Agriculture 
Additionally , according to The World Bank’s ICT 
in Agriculture e-Sourcebook (2011) (The World Bank, 2011) there are three main areas of  application for ICTs in the agricultural sector. 
1. Enhancing productivity on the farm 
ICTs have been utilised to: (i) increase farm productivity , (ii) support research, extension and advisory services, (iii) for the provision 
and access to financial services and (iv) for the 
management of  farmer organisations. 
2. Accessing markets and value chains ICTs have been utilised for: (i) accessing 
market and price information, (ii) facilitating 
the exchange and flow of  information in supply chains, (iii) risk management, information collection, storage, processing and dissemination and (iv) in the 
implementation of  traceability solutions. 
3. Improving public service provision 
ICTs are also utilised in: (i) enhancing 
governance in rural agricultural communities, 
(ii) improving land administration activities 
and (iii) forest governance activities.Potential areas for 
investment
This chapter identifies and maps out existing and 
future gaps within the sector that need to be filled in order to fully exploit ICT4Ag. The 
identified gaps have been innovatively classified 
as follows in order to clearly reveal these potentials: 
1. New agricultural management options 
a) Traceability of  food products 
b) Applications that build on production 
information for access to credit 
c)  ICT solutions for reducing postharvest losses 
2. Current and future technological trends 
a) Big and open data applications for agriculture 
b) Remote sensing and precision agriculture
c) Artificial intelligence and robotics for agriculture
3. Entrepreneurship and human resource development
a) ICT access and affordability 
b) Viable business models for ICT4Ag
c) Growth and scaling up of  ICT4Ag
25
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
New agricultural 
management options
Traceability of food products
The European Union food legislation 
documented in Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 
– general principles and requirements of  food 
law, establishing the European Food Safety 
Authority and procedures for food safety states that “food businesses must: guarantee the traceability of  food, feed and food-producing animals at all stages of  production and 
distribution”(European Union, 2002). 
“Traceability means the ability to track any food, 
feed, food-producing animal or substance that will be used for consumption, through all stages 
of  production, processing and distribution.” 
(European Union, 2007).
The objective of  traceability of  food products in 
Europe and other markets is to ensure food safety 
for consumers, to ensure compliance with standards 
and to facilitate communication along the supply chain, among other needs (Fisher, 2015). The end goal is that of  consumer protection. 
Case study – beef traceability  
systems in Southern Africa
Traceability systems for beef  have been developed in some African countries such as Namibia and Swaziland, with significant levels of  success (Prinsloo & De Villiers, 2016). The 
authors review the application of  cattle 
traceability in these countries and observe that it has had a significant and positive impact on beef  exports to Europe – even for smallholder farmers. For example, in Swaziland, the adoption 
of  traceability using ear tags on livestock, which 
has been uploaded to an information system for consistent data capture, has enabled communal farmers to access export markets. In Namibia, the same system has enabled cattle farmers to 
gain greater acceptability of  their products in 
European export markets such as Norway , thus improving their incomes and potential to export more beef  products to other European countries. 
Case study – horticulture traceability 
systems in Kenya 
Efforts to introduce traceability systems in Kenya 
in 2016 have been implemented by a number of  players such as Feed the Future (Feed the Future, 2016), and various government agencies in collaboration with Kenya’s Agricultural Value 
chain Enterprise (Fresh Plaza, 2016). The Horticulture Traceability System by Feed the 
Future makes use of  QR codes to identify individual smallholder farmers’ produce. Use of  
the system has seen the removal of  Kenya’s 
beans from the EU mandatory inspection list, 
and has resulted in the export of  products 
previously rejected by the EU. 
The challenge 
Traceability systems are not as widely adopted across the African continent as compared to 
developed economies like Australia, Europe and 
North America, and continue to lock out smallholder farmers in countries like Botswana (Boy , 2013) and Kenya (Nanzala, 2007) from 
premium markets such as the EU, Japan and the 
United States.
The lack of  traceability limits the ability of  value 
chain players to keep track of  production and 
processing processes and thus, their ability to address issues of  produce quality . Untraceable products receive blanket bans (Waitathu, 2016), which results in economic declines for the 
country and for the smallholder farmers who are 
not able to find high value markets for their produce. 
Potential for investment 
There is great potential for the development and implementation of  traceability systems in the beef  and horticultural value chains across ACP countries. This will impact in a very significant 
way on the ability of  many smallholder farmers 
to access stringent but profitable European food markets. Other supply chain players such as transport agents and supermarkets will also benefit through the improved volume and value 
of  business.
Applications to collect production 
information for agricultural credit provision
Small-scale farmers require credit to grow their 
enterprises. Credit evaluation procedures by most 
lenders require assessment of  the performance of  
an enterprise with respect to profitability , 
solvency , liquidity , repayment history and the availability of  collateral. In order to provide this information, borrowers need to provide accurate financial records such as balance sheets and 
income statements, among other documents 
(Ellinger & Barry , 2016). Providing this kind of  information is especially challenging for smallholder farmers because most do not keep 26
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
accurate expenses, input and production records. 
Where these can be obtained, they are often 
manual records that are difficult to analyse 
(Salami, Kamara, & Brixiova, 2010). 
Case study – Farmis Kenya 
A recently launched online application, Farmis 
software, is enabling farmers to automate their record keeping for expenses and incomes. This information can then be used by financial institutions to evaluate farmers’ viability for 
credit facilities (Farmis Kenya, 2016). Farmers 
add their expenses information via their phones and the Farmis system provides record keeping, market information and linkages, promotional services, farming tips and access to credit services. There is however no evidence as yet as to the level of  adoption and impact that the 
system has had despite its rollout in Kenya, 
Tanzania and Uganda. 
Case study – Farmsoft US
Farmsoft is a mobile phone app developed by Tenacious Systems Limited in the United States, which makes record keeping of  farm yields and 
profits easier by providing farm and produce 
business management solutions, including food processing and traceability , and food manufacturing and cold chain management.  By improving their traceability , efficient record keeping enables farmers 
to adhere to industry standards of  the British Retail 
Consortium, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points, Global Good Agricultural Practices and the Euro-Retailer Produce Working Group – Good Agricultural Practices. It also enables 
financial institutions to assess farmers’ credit 
worth (FarmSoft, 2017).
The challenge
There are a number of  applications such as Ensibuuko (http://www.ensibuuko.com/), Farmdrive (http://farmdrive.co.ke/) and Musoni (http://musonisystem.com/) that have 
demonstrated significant success in extending 
credit to small-scale farmers. However, these are mainly microfinance management systems and only collect savings, loan and repayment 
information from farmers. The main challenge 
still remains the lack of  reliable and consistent production and income records that can be used to assess farmers’ credit worthiness. 
“Farmers cite unavailability of  credit and capital 
as one of  the major constraints in their business. Financial institutions on the other hand cite lack of  proper farmer records as a major constraint when evaluating farmers' viability for credit’ (Farmis Kenya, 2016).
Potential for investment 
There is potential for investment in the rolling 
out of  farm management software solutions in 
areas such as in smallholder farms in low and 
middle income countries where they have not 
been adopted. These solutions need to be simple in the technologies they require for operation, as well as in the processes whose data they seek to capture. These systems have the potential to improve the ability of  smallholders to access credit by making information on daily and seasonal production available during credit 
application processes. 
ICT solutions for reducing 
postharvest losses
While some aspects of  the postharvest system, 
such as marketing, have been well addressed with respect to ICT solutions, the majority of  the other aspects such as records of  inputs and 
productivity  remain untouched (Rarngirwa & 
Addom, 2013). 
Case study – Chowberry in Nigeria
There are solutions already in existence, such as Chowberry in Nigeria, that help retailers sell products that are about to expire (Chowberry Ltd, 2016). The system allows buyers to search 
using their computers or mobile devices for soon 
to expire products, order, pay and collect them from grocery stores. The products are priced lower than usual to encourage purchases and in the process, reduces postharvest food losses. 
During the 3 month trial of  this app, over 200 
families and 150 orphans were fed while at the same time, over 20 participating grocery stores in Abuja were assisted to sell groceries that would have been thrown away . 
Case study – YieldWise by the  
Rockefeller Foundation 
The Rockefeller Foundation has an ongoing strategy to help combat postharvest food losses. YieldWise creates tools needed by businesses to measure and track supply chain losses and invests in financing models and technology innovations 
that drive mutual economic growth. Their 
strategy focuses on fixing broken links between farmers and buyers by facilitating buyer agreements between farmer groups and multinational companies; aiding farmers to 
access technologies for curbing crop losses e.g. 27
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
metallic silos and hermetic bags; investing in 
financial models for farmer growth; and 
engaging various supply chain actors to monitor 
and prevent food losses globally (Rockefeller 
Foundation, 2016). A 2017 review of  the impacts of  this initiative shows that there will be a 5% reduction in global food loss and wastage between 2016 and 2018 with governments and 
organisations alike either embarking on the 
process of  introducing food loss and waste regulations, or fully effecting them in some cases (Lipinski et al., 2017). 
The challenge 
Postharvest food losses are still a major threat to 
food security in the developing world. There are 
however solutions that use ICTs as a core strategy 
in the reduction of  postharvest food losses. 
Potential for investment 
There is potential for investment in ICT 
solutions that address postharvest losses and reduce wastage. These solutions can take the 
form of  demand and supply forecasting, for 
example, USDA ’s monthly World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates (WASDE). Using global weather forecast information, the WASDE report advises US farmers, policy makers, 
commodity traders and the agricultural industry . 
Moreover, with increasing use of  ICTs, decision makers and stakeholders in the agricultural sector can exchange and receive necessary postharvest information, and rural farmers can 
receive information that affects their harvest time 
as well as how they preserve their harvests. In addition, training videos and other materials can be shared via apps like WhatsApp and used to guide farmers and processors on best practices.
Current and future 
technological trends
Big and open data applications 
for agriculture
Big data, described as “high-volume, high-
velocity and/or high-variety information assets” (Gartner Inc, 2012), has in recent years demonstrated impact in improving agricultural decision-making and subsequent production 
(Bronson & Knezevic, 2016). Increasingly , it is 
used for comparing practices and yields of  farmers in North and Central America based on variables like tillage methods, seeds planted, soil type, water, and pesticide and fertiliser application using tools developed by agribusinesses like Monsanto, DuPont, Valley 
irrigation and Farmlink (Roach, 2016).
A closely related concept is that of  open data 
being “data anyone can access, use and share ” 
(Scott, 2015). This free access to agricultural data 
from governments and research organisations is 
poised to have a significant impact on farming activities globally . To this end, there exists a lot of  open data for agriculture from a great number of  sources such as The World Bank (The World Bank, 2016), the Kenya Open Data (Kenya Open Data, 2016) and the Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) (Global 
Open Data, 2016). 
Case study – The Dutch Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs’ Geodata for  
Agriculture and Water (G4AW)  
programme 
The use of  big data in the food chain is already 
widespread with applications for the development of  new seeds, precision farming 
and food tracking (Estes, 2016). 
The Geodata for Agriculture and Water (G4AW) 
programme by the Dutch Ministry of  Foreign Affairs is sponsoring the development and 
deployment of  applications for decision support, 
crop monitoring and weather information systems among others, that use satellite and other geo-data such as shape files, geodatabases and coverage to inform farming activities, such as the 
selection of  seeds, by providing early warning of  
drought, flooding and crop disease. This data is then delivered to farmers via mobile apps and SMS messages (G4AW , 2016). These programmes are being implemented in 26 
G4AW African and Asian partner countries. 
Case study – Transparency, land 
rights and land tenure regularisation in Rwanda
The use of  open data was adopted by the 
Rwandan government between 2004 and 
2014 – particularly for the development of  a 
national digital land registry . The project, 
executed with financial support from the International Development Association, sought to provide registered land titles to all landholders in the country . It has been a success with over 
10.3 million land parcels in the country (84%) 
receiving approval for land titles. The data collected has been availed to other government agencies such as the Ministry of  Agriculture and, 28
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
in particular, lending institutions, who have in 
turn been able to extend credit to rural 
communities for expansion of  their businesses 
and farming enterprises (Compton, 2016). 
Farmers then use the titles as collateral to secure credit facilities from the financial institutions.
The challenge
The benefits of  big, open data for prediction and analysis in the practice of  smart farming activities is mainly felt by large scale farmers and other stakeholders such as agricultural input providers in developed countries. These farmers and other stakeholders are better informed and equipped to make use of  data collection and 
analysis tools like the Open Data Kit and 
Hadoop – a software library that allows for the distributed processing of  large data. 
Access to big, open data has not spread to 
smallholder farmers due to the lack of  suitable tools for the collection, processing and retrieval of  such information (Roach, 2016). Additionally , there is a critical lack of  access to tools to 
facilitate these smallholder farmers to access and 
utilise the open data available. 
Potential for investment 
The farming community , smallholder farmers included, stands to benefit from the greater adoption of  data driven agricultural techniques (Roach, 2016). Due to this, there is potential for 
the development of  tools such as Tableau – a data analysis software that helps people see and 
understand their data, and the IBM SPSS Modeler which can be used by both large and 
small-scale farmers to access relevant open data 
for use in diverse farming activities. 
The development of  such apps also stands to 
benefit the developers if  they succeed in 
producing commercially viable solutions for use 
by the farming community . There is also 
potential for research and government 
organisations to invest in making open data more 
accessible to researchers and application developers in organisations and countries where this is not already in place. 
Remote sensing and precision 
agriculture
Gathering of  the right information from the field 
enables farm managers and owners to make informed decisions on the interventions needed at farm level, without the need to visit the farm. 
This has the potential to facilitate data-driven 
decision-making by making data collection easier and more effective. 
Case study – National Remote  
Sensing Centre, India
One successful example of  remote sensing is that of  the Indian National Remote Sensing Centre. The various areas of  application are depicted in Figure 3 below.29
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
Figure 3: Remote sensing applications in India (National Remote Sensing Center: Indian Space 
Organization, 2017)
Remote sensing has been used to inform 
agricultural policy decisions; to monitor drought situations; for crop damage assessment and crop planning purposes; to tailor agronomic practices; 
and for demand-based irrigation scheduling. The 
remote sensing centre has seen the development of  a number of  operational products and services, for example, measurement of  acreage and production estimates of  major crops, annual 
land use mapping for crop intensification, 
cropping system analyses and the development of  satellite-based bio-geophysical products (National Remote Sensing Center: Indian Space 
Organization, 2017). 
Case study – GIS analysis by the 
World Food Program’s Operation Department of Emergency 
 
Preparedness (ODEP) 
The World Food Program’s ODEP uses GIS 
analysis, alongside additional data from the Famine Early Warning Systems Networks of  US government agencies, to understand the 
vulnerabilities of  populations living in areas 
prone to natural disasters. This approach helps monitor a variety of  structures such as dams – to ensure they can withstand rising flood water; buildings – to determine their structural 
integrity; hillsides – after deforestation and land 
use patterns – to reduce mudslides. This knowledge aids in preparation efforts for emergency response activities. 
The challenge
The greatest challenges in remote sensing and precision agriculture resources emanate from their lack of  availability , and the often prohibitive costs associated with acquiring and using them (Plant, 2001; Zhang & Kovacs, 2012). For these 
reasons, alternative low cost technologies have 
emerged involving small unmanned aerial vehicles and low altitude remote sensing platforms. These alternatives have high spatial AgricultureAgriculture  
land 
monitoringCrop area 
estimation &  
production 
forecast
Agriculture 
drought 
assessment & 
monitoring
Horticulture 
crop area 
estimation & 
monitoring
Cropping 
systems 
analysis Global crop 
programmeInland  
fishery 
development
Command 
area & water  
resources 
monitoringPest/
disease 
detection & 
incidence 
forecasting
Soil  
mapping & 
monitoring 30
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
and temporal resolution, flexibility in image 
acquisition programming and low operational 
costs (Xiang & Tian, 2011). 
Potential for investment
There is great potential for additional investment 
in the development of  affordable technologies for remote sensing. This was first occasioned by the US government’s decision to allow satellite images to be marketed commercially , and has 
resulted in increasing demand for digital satellite 
imagery to meet various commercial end-user applications. Additionally , significant investment and action in increasing awareness of  their availability and associated benefits is required if  smallholder farmers are to realise said benefits of  high quality information gathering, and 
informed decision-making. 
Artificial intelligence and 
robotics for agriculture  
“ Artificial intelligence [AI] refers to the ability of  
a computer or a computer-enabled robotic system to process information and produce outcomes in a manner similar to the thought 
process of  humans in learning, decision-making 
and solving problems. By extension, the goal of  AI systems is to develop systems capable of  tackling complex problems in ways similar to human logic and reasoning.” (Price Waterhouse 
Coopers, 2017).
For agriculture in developed countries, AI and 
robotics have been used mainly for monitoring crop conditions, plant populations and soil 
moisture content (Shehzadi, 2017). 
Additionally , they are used for automated irrigation, crop health monitoring, crop spraying using drones, facial recognition of  cows, crop harvesting and early warning 
systems (A.I Business Team, 2017).
The challenge 
Whilst the potential for AI application in agriculture has been recognised, its application 
has not succeeded in practice – due to a lack of  
adoption by smallholders – in most developing 
countries. Agriculture, unlike other areas of  AI 
practice, such as medicine, operates in a very unpredictable environment, for instance, there are frequent weather changes; soil quality can vary in a single field; pests and diseases affect 
different sections of  a farm, and the variations are even greater when the scope changes from a 
locality to a country or continent. Thousands of  factors must therefore be taken into account for 
the implementation of  AI solutions in agriculture 
(Byrum, 2017). 
Potential for investment
There is great potential for the development of  more AI technologies and approaches that can find practical application on small farms, as well as in advocating their use among smallholder farmers. Where the relevant environmental factors have been considered within the technology , the adoption of  AI can enable smallholder farmers to benefit from 
smart farming techniques through the 
utilisation of  sensors and intelligent systems in the management of  crop and livestock production. 
Entrepreneurship 
and human resource 
development
ICT access and affordability
Universal access to ICTs, broadly described as 
the geographical spread of  ICTs to allow access to the greater population in a country  (The 
World Bank, 2011), has not yet been achieved, 
especially in rural areas of  developing countries. 
People living in rural areas still experience lower access to the internet than their urban counterparts. 3G internet access for rural areas is 29% globally as compared to 89% in urban 
areas. Household internet access in developing 
and least developing countries remains very low with only 34% and 7% of  households respectively having access. 
The cost of  internet services remains high in 
developing and least developed countries with prices reportedly three times the global average. Between 2008 and 2011, the prices have stagnated and even increased slightly in least 
developed countries (International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), 2015).
An affordable universal service is one in which 
the “cost of  average monthly usage is a small 
percentage of  monthly gross national income per 
capita” (Dymond et al., 2010). 31
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
The challenge 
A greater percentage of  new ICT4Ag are being 
developed to make use of  the internet and for use by farmers, most of  whom live in rural areas. The lack of  universal access and challenges with respect to affordability has the potential to limit 
uptake and effective utilisation of  these ICTs 
among target populations. 
A 2015 article by Mobilink cites the case of  
limited 3G network access hindering the 
utilsation of  3G-dependent apps and 
technologies for remote monitoring, field equipment automation, tracking, geofencing, surveying and marketing for agriculture in Pakistan. There are however some current efforts by mobile network operators to increase the 3G and 4G network coverage in Pakistan as a measure to facilitate the use of  ICTs in 
agriculture and other sectors (Baloch, 2016). 
According to a 2015 Groupe Speciale Mobile 
Alliance (GSMA) Intelligence report, the use of  mobile applications in agriculture is limited by , 
among other issues, poor network coverage, 
particularly in rural areas in emerging markets (GSMA, 2015). 
Potential for investment 
There is great potential for investment in extending 3G networks to rural areas in order to facilitate access to ICT4Ag by stakeholders in these areas. 
The utilisation of  mobile-based applications and 
other equipment also requires access to reliable and affordable power. This is an area for investment that can facilitate the setting up of  
base stations – short-range trans-receivers that 
connect mobile phones and other wireless devices to a central hub that allows network connection – in rural areas.
With respect to affordability , there is room to 
develop solutions that can reduce the cost of  broadband in developing and least developed countries. 
Viable business models for 
ICT4Ag
Businesses that incorporate ICT4Ag 
demonstrate its potential to deliver sustainable 
and profitable enterprises. Examples of  these 
include the highly successful weather-based index 
insurance product, Kilimo Salama (ACRE Africa, 2016). Optiserve Technologies is another 
example of  ICTs being used successfully in agriculture (InfoDev, 2016). The company has 
developed the ePinoysFarm, a monitoring and 
evaluation system for government agencies and a farm management tool for coconut, buffalo dairy production and apiculture enterprises. The application helps manage daily agricultural 
and fisheries operations, including monitoring 
the implementation of  community-based 
interventions using record keeping and data 
validation information. In addition, it helps 
collect agricultural information for various agencies including research institutions,  agricultural state universities and the local governments.
Whilst examples of  success abound, an even 
greater number of  ICT4Ag failures are 
documented by CTA, among others, in their recent 2016 report Lessons for Sustainability: Failing to Scale ICT4Ag-Enabled Services  (Shepherd, 2016). 
The lack of  viable business models is 
documented as a key challenge to the scaling up 
and sustainability of  ICT4Ag in the nine case studies documented. 
The challenge 
Incidentally , the majority of  ICT4Ag developers are young, tech-savvy and forward thinking. However, among other things, they tend to lack backgrounds in agricultural-related areas of  
study . As a result, apps, products and services 
that are developed using ICTs are not an exact fit for end users (Bascombe, 2014).
“Encouraging more people, especially youth, to 
engage in app development and helping them 
materialise their ideas through proper facilities and training by competent authorities is still lacking in many areas,” says Suchiradipta Bhattacharjee, agricultural extension PhD 
scholar at the Central Agricultural University in 
Meghalaya, India.
Additionally , application developers have also 
been found to have a great dependency on donor 
funding and lack sustainable business models for 
their applications (Shepherd, 2016).  
“We did not have a business model. Who would 
pay? How much should they be charged? How 
would they pay? We eventually realised that 
farmers could not pay .” (Shepherd, 2016).32
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
Potential for investment 
There is great potential for investment in 
agricultural business incubation hubs that have proven viable mechanisms for nurturing small and start-up agricultural enterprises (Essiet, 2016). 
“Business incubation is a unique and highly 
flexible combination of  business development processes, infrastructure and people designed to nurture new and small businesses by helping them to survive and grow through the difficult 
and vulnerable early stages of  development,” 
(Diogenes Business Incubator, 2016).
Investment can be modelled on the highly 
successful Agri-business Incubation Programme 
by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ABI – ICRISAT), that 
brings together a wide variety of  resources, 
networks, training and capital. Such resources are invested to foster agribusinesses to bring ICRISAT’s research for development innovations to the market for a faster and wider 
scale impact. Case study – ABI – ICRISAT  
agri-business incubator
The business incubator promotes commercialisation of  agricultural technology 
through public-private partnership. So far, the 
programme has incubated over 108 ventures 
and the incubator has also made a profit from 
its operations (Peer, 2015). One agri-venture to receive incubation, Bioseed, has expanded from India to Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Laos, Nepal and Thailand and is among the few 
biotechnology companies with expertise in 
various fields, including research and development, field and lab testing, and farm and production management. 
The framework presented in Figure 4 
incorporates a very wide variety of  approaches 
that, when combined for the benefit of  an 
agricultural enterprise, ultimately lead to its success in the market.
Figure 4: Business framework for incubation (Karuppanchetty, 2007)CapitalisationR&D
Business planning
Business developmentHigh 
performance 
incubationAccess to R&D networks
Specialised facilities
Product development  
best practices
State-of-the-art  
marketing best  
practices 
Access to  
services
Value proposition  
development
Sales & distribution  
channel strategies
Exchange of ideasIP identification &  
protection strategies
Access to capital
Networks &  
alliances
Champions
Strategy  
development33
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Potential for investment in ICTs for agriculture 
Growth and scaling up of 
ICT4Ag
There are numerous ICT4Ag applications that 
have demonstrated potential and impact, albeit on small scales, in specific geographical areas and value chains. Some of  these applications are in the post pilot and proof  of  concept stages, and 
often only require capital injection to enable 
them to grow and scale in greater levels of  impact and profitability . 
“Scaling is about adding revenue at an 
exponential rate while only adding resources at an incremental rate” (Fundable LLC, 2012).
Scaling up is the ideal end goal of  any solution 
with the aim of  reaching more users and generating more revenue for investors. 
Case study – CTA initiatives to  
identify and promote apps ready  
for scaling up 
CTA has a number of  initiatives aimed at identifying and promoting applications that are ready to scale. 
These efforts include:
• The development of  a database called the 
Apps4Ag database that documents ICTs in 
agriculture with a demonstrated potential for 
greater utilisation and scaling. 
 
 
“By sharing app details via Apps4Ag, application developers develop business opportunities with potential users or partners and investors through increased visibility ,” 
says Serge Kedja, ICT for development 
consultant, CTA.• Hosting of  events such as the ‘Plug and Play’ that bring together ICT4Ag innovators, investors and users to review existing 
applications. 
“The investors are provided with a unique 
platform to identify viable areas for investment” says Kedja.
• Offering grants for the scaling up of  
applications that already have an existing market presence and could extend their impact to more beneficiaries (CTA, 2014). 
The challenge
The CTA publication Lessons for Sustainability: Failing to Scale brings to the fore a number of  issues that cause otherwise potentially useful ICT4Ag applications, not to have a greater 
impact beyond their pilot or proof  of  
 
concept stages. 
Applications may fail to scale due to a lack of  
capital, a lack of  enabling partnerships for 
growth, use of  technologies and development 
approaches that limit growth, poor promotion and user training, or poor implementation processes (Shepherd, 2016).
Potential for investment 
There is great potential for investment in ICT4Ag that have passed the post pilot and proof  of  concept stages. These are applications 
that already have a market presence and 
revenues are in need of  capital injection to enable them to grow into new geographical regions, reach more clients and venture in to new value chains. REFERENCES
34
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?References
A.I Business Team. (2017). Artificial Intelligence 
in Agriculture. Part 2: How Farming is Going 
Automated with AI Technologies” AI.Business. Retrieved from http://ai.
business/2016/05/06/artificial-intelligence-
in-agriculture-part-2-how-farming-is-going-automated-with-ai-technologies/
ACRE Africa. (2016). Acre Africa. Retrieved 
from http://acreafrica.com/
Baloch, A. (2016, 2016-09-07). m-Agriculture An 
emerging field to Revive Agriculture in Pakistan - PhoneWorld. Retrieved from https://www.phoneworld.com.pk/m-agriculture-an-emerging-field-to-
revive-agriculture-in-pakistan/
Bascombe, K. (2014, 2014-10-21). Challenges to 
Replicating & Scaling up: ICT4Ag Projects. 
Retrieved from https://technology4agri.wordpress.com/2014/10/21/challenges-to-
replicating-scaling-up-ict4ag-projects/
Boy , R. L. (2013). Cattle Traceability: A Threat 
to Sustainable Supply Of  Beef  To EU: A 
Botswana Meat Commission. European 
Journal of  Logistics Purchasing and Supply 
Chain Management, 1(1), pp 1- 9. 
Bronson, K., & Knezevic, I. (2016). Big Data in 
Food and Agriculture. Retrieved from http://
bds.sagepub.com/
content/3/1/2053951716648174
Byrum, J. (2017, 2017-02-20). The Challenges 
for Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture  - 
AgFunderNews. Retrieved from https://agfundernews.com/the-challenges-for-artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture.html
Chowberry Ltd. (2016). Chowberry - Buy 
packaged food at low prices before they 
expire. Retrieved from http://chowberry .
com/index.php
Compton, S. (2016). Global Open Data for 
Agriculture & Nutrition: Success Stories. 
Global Open Data for Agriculture & 
Nutrition, 1. 
CTA. (2014). CTA announces grants to five 
institutions to facilitate the scaling up of  ICT solutions in ACP countries. Retrieved from 
http://www.cta.int/en/article/2014-08-27/cta-announces-grants-to-five-institutions-to-facilitate-the-scaling-up-of-ict-solutions-in-
acp-count.html
Diogenes Business Incubator. (2016). Business 
Incubation Definition - Diogenes Business 
Incubator. Retrieved from http://www.diogenes-incubator.com/incubation/business-incubation-definition
Ellinger, P . N., & Barry , P . J. (2016). A Farmer's 
Guide to Agricutural Credit. Retrieved from http://www.farmdoc.illinois.edu/finance/FarmersGuidetoCreditBody .htm
Essiet, D. (2016). How agri-business incubators 
can boost agric, create jobs - The Nation Nigeria. Small Business and Entrepreneurship. 
Estes, V . (2016, 2016-06-09). How Big Data is 
Disrupting Agriculture from Biological Discovery to Farming Practices - AgFunderNews. Retrieved from https://agfundernews.com/how-big-data-is-disrupting-agriculture-from-biological-
discovery-to-farming-practices5973.html
European Union. (2002). Regulation (EC) No 
178/2002 – general principles and 
requirements of  food law, establishing the 
European Food Safety Authority and 
procedures for food safety . Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex:32002R0178
European Union. (2007). Food Traceability . 
Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/food/sites/food/files/safety/docs/gfl_req_factsheet_traceability_2007_en.pdf  
Farmis Kenya. (2016). Welcome to FARMIS. 
Retrieved from http://www.farmis.co.ke/
FarmSoft. (2017). Farm record keeping app. 
Retrieved from https://www.farmsoft.com/farm-management-software/farm-record-keeping-app/
Feed the Future. (2016). From Plant to Plate: 
Kenya’s National Horticulture Traceability System. Retrieved from https://www.REFERENCES
35
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?feedthefuture.gov/article/plant-plate-kenya’s-
national-horticulture-traceability-system
Fisher, W . (2015, 2015-03-17). The Importance 
of  Food Traceability . Food Safety Magazine. 
Retrieved from http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/enewsletter/the-importance-of-food-traceability/
Fresh Plaza. (2016). Kenya: National 
Horticulture Traceability System launched. Retrieved from http://www.freshplaza.com/article/163270/Kenya-National-Horticulture-Traceability-System-launched
Fundable LLC. (2012, 2012-11-19). Growth vs. 
Scaling - Fundable. Retrieved from https://www.fundable.com/blog/post/growth-vs-scaling
Gartner Inc. (2012, 2012-05-25). What Is Big 
Data? - Gartner IT Glossary - Big Data. Retrieved from http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/big-data/
Geodata for Agriculture and Water (G4AW). 
(2016). About G4AW . Retrieved from http://g4aw.spaceoffice.nl/en/About-G4AW/
Global Open Data. (2016). Global Open Data 
for Agriculture and Nutrition | Grow Africa. 
Retrieved from https://www.growafrica.
com/organizations/global-open-data-agriculture-and-nutrition
Groupe Speciale Mobile Alliance (GSMA). 
(2015). Agricultural machine-to-machine 
 
(Agri M2M): a platform for expansion. 
InfoDev. (2016). ICT in Agriculture: A Successful 
Story of  Optiserve Technologies in Philippines | infoDev. Retrieved from http://www.infodev.org/articles/ict-agriculture-successful-story-optiserve-technologies-philippines
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 
(2015). ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2015. Geneva, Switzerland. 
Kenya Open Data. (2016). Kenya Open Data 
Portal. Retrieved from https://opendata.go.ke/
Lipinski, B., Clowes, A., Goodwin, L., Hanson, 
C., Swannell, R., & Mitchell, P . (2017). SDG Target 12.3 on Food Loss and Waste: 2017 
Progress Report.Moran, M. S., Inoue, Y ., & Barnes, E. (1997). 
Opportunities and limitations for image-
based remote sensing in precision crop management. Remote sensing of  Environment, 61(3), 319-346. 
Nanzala, E. (2007). Traceability for small-scale 
livestock farmers in Africa. Retrieved from http://www.new-ag.info/en/developments/devItem.php?a=173
National Remote Sensing Center: Indian Space 
Organization. (2017). Agriculture | National Remote Sensing Centre. Retrieved from https://nrsc.gov.in/Agriculture
Peer, N. (2015, 2015-05-21). Agritech startups 
grow in India as more incubators sprout for support. TechInAsia. Retrieved from https://
www.techinasia.com/india-startup-
incubators-agriculture
Plant, R. E. (2001). Site-specific management: 
the application of  information technology to 
crop production. Computers and Electronics 
in Agriculture, 30(1), 9-29. 
Price Waterhouse Coopers. (2017). Artificial 
Intelligence and Robotics – 2017: Leveraging 
artificial intelligence and robotics for 
sustainable growth.  
Prinsloo, T ., & De Villiers, C. (2016). Traceability 
Systems in Swaziland and Namibia: 
Improving Access to Markets with Digital 
Information. Paper presented at the IST Africa 2016, Durban, South Africa.
Rao, J., & Ranga, A. (2001). Remote Sensing 
and Agriculture. Kisan World, 28, 49-50. 
Rarngirwa, D., & Addom, B. K. (2013). 
Emerging innovations in ICTs. ICT Update. Retrieved from http://ictupdate.cta.int/Feature-Articles/Emerging-innovations-in-ICTs/(74)/1381498281
Roach, J. (2016). Can Data-Driven Agriculture 
Help Feed a Hungry World? by John Roach: Yale Environment 360.  Retrieved from http://e360.yale.edu/feature/can_data-driven_
agriculture_help_feed_a_hungry_world/2969/
Rockefeller Foundation. (2016). YieldWise - The 
Rockefeller Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/
our-work/initiatives/yieldwise/REFERENCES
36
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Salami, A., Kamara, A. B., & Brixiova, Z. 
(2010). Smallholder Agriculture in East 
Africa: Trends, Constraints and 
Opportunities.  
Scott, A. E. (2015). How can we improve 
agriculture, food and nutrition with open 
data?  
Shehzadi, F . (2017). Artificial Intelligence in 
Agriculture. Retrieved from http://technologytimes.pk/post.php?title=
 
Artificial+Intelligence+in+Agriculture
Shepherd, A. (2016). Lessons for Sustainability: 
Failing to scale ICT4Ag-enabled Services.  
The World Bank. (2011). ICT in Agriculture - 
Connecting Smallholders to Knowledge, Networks, and Institutions.  The World Bank. (2016). Data | The World 
Bank. Retrieved from http://data.worldbank.org/
Waitathu, N. (2016). Fresh produce farmers, 
firms banned from European Union market. Retrieved from http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000131207/fresh-produce-
farmers-firms-banned-from-european-union-
market
Xiang, H., & Tian, L. (2011). Method for 
automatic georeferencing aerial remote sensing (RS) images from an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform. Biosystems Engineering, 108(2), 104-113. 
Zhang, C., & Kovacs, J. M. (2012). The 
application of  small unmanned aerial systems for precision agriculture: a review. Precision agriculture, 13(6), 693-712. 37
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
Contents
This chapter identifies the challenges faced by 
ICT4Ag that need to be addressed, as well as 
how the identified challenges can inform 
investment opportunities. The chapter 
categorises ICT4Ag challenges into three main 
areas: (1) national and international policy environment and protocols that govern the design, use and regulation of  the entire ICT4D sector, (2) available infrastructure and capacity building/available expertise, and (3) the nature of  the rural setting, as well as the knowledge and 
cultural inclinations of  local communities that 
influence their ability to use the technology to access information for their day-to-day activities. 
This chapter further explores the three main 
areas more broadly to cover the following points 
as modified from Devex Impact editor review (Devex Impact, 2013): sustainability and scale; limited knowledge on design, use, adoption and management of  ICT technologies; pace of  changing roles and norms; high cost of  available 
ICT-related technologies in developing 
economies; weak institutions; inadequate collaboration; awareness of  existing ICT facilities and resources and inadequate ICT policies and regulations.
Introduction 
FAO projects the world’s population will reach about 10 billion by 2050, and the expected urban population will increase to 70% from the 
current 49%. This would require smallholder 
farmers, who dominate in food production, to increase their production by over 60%. At current growth rates, most developing countries’ agricultural sectors will fail to meet these targets due to challenges posed by , among others, 
climate change, limited land availability , 
competition for uses of  arable land, and an aging population of  farmers. 
There are a growing number of  ICT-based 
initiatives seeking to solve and improve aspects of   
societal challenges whilst ensuring the economic value of  the solutions they offer in, for example, agricultural extension services, especially in Asia and Africa. However, although agriculture is one of  the largest economic sectors in the world – with a net income estimated at €100 billion and assets of  about €1.7 trillion – compared to other sectors, such as manufacturing and trading, it has received less investment in ICT innovations 
(Dutia, 2014).
Very little rigorous, evidence-based impact 
evaluations of  ICT4Ag have been conducted. From the available literature, most studies have looked at the impact ICT4Ag initiatives and interventions have had on helping farmers access market and price differentials. However, such 
studies have been shy in identifying, as well as 
stating possible solutions to the challenges faced by ICT4Ag initiatives in the areas of  design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and regulation and institutional structures. 
Finance and related sustainability measures that 
would lead investors and entrepreneurs to advance the ICT4Ag sector, from a business perspective, have also mostly been omitted from 
such studies. In trying to fill this gap and the 
others mentioned above, this chapter discusses the nature of  the challenges facing ICT4Ag and derives most of  the examples from ACP countries where such challenges are more 
evident than in many advanced economies 
(Asenso-Okyere and Mekonnen, 2012; FAO-ITU, 2016; CTA, 2016). Challenges that could also serve as opportunities to entice investors and entrepreneurs to invest in ICT4Ag initiatives are also presented in this chapter. All findings have 
been linked to cases identified in an extensive 
literature review. 
Data analysis
Data for this chapter was collected from primary and secondary sources. Interviews were held with ICT4Ag businesses and start-ups, investors, entrepreneurs, researchers, investors, regulators 
and scholars from the field of  study . Case studies 
of  challenges encountered in agricultural value chains, as well as the agricultural field more broadly , were analysed. In particular, the use of  ICT4Ag tools and business models to enhance 
and improve agriculture development in ACP 
countries formed the unit of  analysis. 38
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
Sub-Saharan Africa
Wabwoba et al. (2012) identified that the fluctuations and high costs of electricity were challenges in sub-
Saharan African countries. Other scholars found that income and attainment of ICT-related education, as well as social and cultural constrains, are other factors that affect the likelihood of individuals having ICT 
skills. These challenges thus affect the optimum use of ICT4Ag technologies in communities across sub-
Saharan Africa (Gillwald et al., 2010; Huyer, 2003; Hafkin and Odame, 2002). Furthermore, looking at panel data from Uganda, Muto and Yamano (2009) found that the total value of assets and the education level of both male and female household members are directly related to the possession of mobile phones.
In rural areas of  developing countries where 
investment in ICTs is desperately needed, most ICT operators are not willing to invest due to the poorly diversified and ‘risky’ production systems which generally focus on rain-fed staple crop 
production, and raising livestock. There is also a 
huge cost in investing in limited or non-existing infrastructure. Therefore, unless investors and entrepreneurs have a strong incentive to do so, 
investments tend not to enhance agricultural 
production and entire value chains. This is seen even where projects initiated by donors and international organisations have reached the stage of  scale-up. Literature shows that in Nigeria, an investment of  €420 per week would be required to finance the production and broadcast of  3-6 hours per week of  an interactive farm radio programme (Agwu et al., 2008). India, Mozambique and 
Tanzania have documented case studies of  this challenge (Scott et al., 2005), which implies that many rural households simply cannot afford 
 
the use of  modern ICTs to advance the production and scale of  many agriculture commodity chains. Results
This section presents the results from data analysis of  the challenges identified. 
Sustainability and scale
International organisations have been the main 
initiators of  ICT4D and for that matter, ICT4Ag 
initiatives across countries and continents. Most 
of  these initiatives and projects have been 
temporal, involving small-scale and pilot projects. These do not help to create sustainable elements that are expected from ICT4Ag-related business investments and their scale-up (Devex Impact, 2013; Duncombe and Heeks, 2005). 
Whilst it is evident that governments have 
created some enabling economic environments 
for start-ups and projects to explore the use of  ICT4Ag tools, it is also clear that issues of  taxes and income generation have affected scale-ups as 
well as exploration of  business opportunities by investors (Asenso-Okyere and Mekonnen, 2012). Investors consider involvement in ICT4Ag 
business initiatives to be expensive. It is suggested that the high cost of  ICT tools, gadgets and machinery , as well as the training of  human resources to manage, maintain and move such 
businesses to break-even before making profits, 
serve as disincentives for investors. 
Many developing countries have inadequate 
infrastructure for the widespread use of  ICTs, such as unreliable mobile reception and electricity , particularly in rural areas where the majority of  production is carried out. Furthermore, inadequate infrastructure and services such as ICT centres, gadgets, and 
management and maintenance challenges affect 
the use of  and investment in ICT4Ag initiatives and businesses.39
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
Farmerline
In partnership with worldwide foundation initiatives, the GhanaWeb foundation created Farmerline in 2013 
with an award of €250 to start the company. Funding from the Indigo Trust enabled Farmerline to test their 
voice communication software, which focused on aquaculture, in consultation with extension officers and farmers. Aside from voice technology, the company provides a data collection platform for agribusinesses 
to manage their supply chains, profile farmers, map farms, and conduct traceability and audit assessments. 
The messaging technology delivers content to farmers in local languages on weather alerts, market prices and good agricultural and financial tips. The technology developed by Farmerline has been rebranded as MERGDATA and is used in other sectors such as education, health and finance.
As of 2016, the company had 21 members of staff (having started with four in 2013). Farmers and 
businesses have helped to shape the focus of the company – which is to increase smallholders’ access to 
information, inputs, and resources for increased productivity – by providing feedback. As a technology-
based company and service provider, Farmerline suggests to investors that they are a start-up with the potential for scaling-up. 
Challenges: Obtaining funding to scale operations and recruiting high level experts to enable the company 
to move into other sectors was a challenge. Direct incentives from governments, such as tax breaks and support systems, were not provided to the company during its start-up stages. Start-ups in the ICT4Ag sector would benefit from the development of policy, investment and funding mechanisms to help them to 
thrive from the National Communication Authority/Ministry of Communication, the Ghanaian Government, 
investors and telecommunication companies.
Business implementation strategy: Rely on local talents; provide capacity building for staff; build strategic 
partnership.  
Source: Worlali Senyo, Farmerline representative, December 2016
Limited knowledge on design, use, 
adoption and management of ICTs
Technological challenges have emerged as areas 
that need much input and attention in the ICT4D field. FAO summarised this as follows:
‘...A serious gap at global and regional levels is 
the inability of  ICT professionals to comprehend the complexity of  challenges in AR4D (Agriculture Research for Development) and AIS (Agriculture Innovation Systems). Experience 
shows that ICT professionals tend to make 
oversimplified assumptions about the production and value-addition processes in agriculture, and therefore, tend to offer off-the-shelf  solutions that often would not meet the requirement of  AR4D. 
It is therefore necessary to establish a dialogue 
with interested ICT experts and help them build their capacities to understand the nature of  agriculture...’ (FAO-ITU, 2016).
In the rural areas of  many developing countries, 
the provision of  infrastructure for public utilities such as electricity and mobile phone networks is lacking. Therefore, it becomes very difficult to deploy ICT devices to such communities, and ultimately leads to higher costs of  internet provision. In some instances, private companies have invested in the provision of  electricity to villages, which has reduced the high cost of  ICT 
provision. Where electricity is unreliable and 
where government and private investment is lacking, teaching and capacity building on the use of  ICT4Ag tools to improve and enhance agriculture-related activities are found wanting. 
Extension services, such as the provision of  farm 
marketing and management advice, are almost non-existent in many ACP countries since most agricultural extension staff have low capacities to 
deliver such services. Furthermore, most rural 
folk cannot afford computers or smart phones due to their lower income statuses as compared to their urban counterparts. This impounds the digital divide between urban and the rural areas, 
which negatively affects agricultural production 
because most agricultural activities are carried out in the rural areas.40
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
The Asian countries
India, Best and Maier (2007) studied the role of ICTs in empowering rural women in India and concluded that, 
whilst most ICT initiatives are disseminating new information and knowledge useful for rural women, many are not able to make use of them due to low literacy rates and lack of financial support to acquire ICT appliances.
Data management issues, such as inadequate 
data to assess the real situation on the ground and identify possible areas for investment, further serve as disincentives for entrepreneurs and investors to become involved. In recent years however, these challenges have been tackled through collaboration among NGOs, governments, extension staff and ICT service providers (MTN, ORANGE, SAFARICOM, etc.) across the developing world.
Caribbean countries
The University of the West Indies (St. Augustine) identified a lack of data, as well as a lack of knowledge on 
ICTs and their use among farmers, as an important challenge facing the use and scale-up of ICT4Ag. The university responded by developing AgriNeTT – a series of mobile apps which help farmers geo-spatially understand the characteristics of their land and the most suitable crops to plant. The apps can also be used 
to track expenses and profitability of crops as well as real time prices. The technology is helping to improve 
data availability and ICT awareness among farmers. 
The development of, and investment in, context 
and content specific ICT4Ag applications to solve identified challenges continue to be sponsored by donor-driven initiatives as well as 
private organisations and collaborations such as 
the EU, CTA, the Asian Development Bank, the African Development Bank, the Standard Bank of  Africa (Stanbic Africa), the MasterCard Foundation, the Grameen Foundation, Vodafone, 
MTN, Safaricom and FAO-ITU, among others. 
It is therefore important that investors and entrepreneurs take advantage of  the pre-laid foundation to help invest, as well as scale up ICT4Ag applications and initiatives across the 
developing world. 
Pace of changing roles and norms
The business sector is either excluded or not 
exploited to harness their core competencies to create ICT4Ag tools and initiatives that can 
become investible, self-sustaining and profit-
oriented businesses. There is a tendency for organisations, farmers and institutions that have worked in agriculture-related interventions and extension services, as well as the management of  
such, to find it difficult to embrace new ways of  
performing the same old tasks. The use of  ICT4Ag approaches changes the roles and norms for these actors and they do not always embrace, use and adopt the technologies. The 
last 10 years have however seen an increase in 
the use of  ICT4Ag applications by farmers, organisations and institutions to help mitigate challenges encountered in the agriculture sector of  developing economies (Devex Impact, 2013; Duncombe and Heeks, 2005).
According to Carden (2009), the emergence of  
new ICT possibilities presents some potentially fundamental and far-reaching questions that challenge or even undermine the assumptions on which actors and donors came into being. There 
are also gaps in terms of  access, communication, 
and resources that actors such as governments, donors and international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) have historically played an important role in addressing. While some of  
these gaps still exist, they are, arguably , not as 
clear or compelling as they once were.
High cost of available ICT-related 
technologies in developing  
economies
There is a significant challenge in adequately 
planning and financing the use of  ICTs in development and agriculture initiatives (Bhatnagar, 2000). With cyclical donor funding and pressure to minimise administrative and 
management costs, it is often difficult for actors 
such as farmers and INGOs to properly plan, resource finances, and engage human investment in ICTs as core capacities for such initiatives. The telecommunication sector for countries such 
as Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and Senegal are very 
dynamic, primarily due to the high costs of  the ICT services (Calandro et al., 2010).41
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
There are however interesting areas that need further focus including the use of unmanned aerial vehicles 
to capture data and disseminate information, products and services such as the delivery of inputs to farmers (see Appendix 1).
Financial challenges that comprise high estimated 
costs and capital intensive initial investment costs, 
also serve as disincentives to investors and 
entrepreneurs. Limited investments are thus 
recorded in ACP countries due to insecure and undocumented finance and viability analyses that prevail around ICT4Ag investments. 
Weak institutions, inadequate  
collaboration, awareness of existing 
ICT facilities and resources
Calandro et al. (2010) argue that the national 
objective for most African countries to achieve universal and affordable access to a full range of  ICTs has been undermined by poor policy 
constraints, weak institutional arrangements and 
low level infrastructural development. As an example, Warid telecom in Côte d’Ivoire operates under very high service charges. 
Furthermore, Gilwald, Milek and Stork (2010) 
argue that in addition to competition and open access regimes of  ICTs, effective regulation of  other factors such as spectrum, interconnection and tariffs is required to stimulate market 
growth, improve access and ultimately lower 
prices of  ICTs in most African countries.
The issues of  national security , as well as the 
need to regulate unwarranted use of  
cyberspace as a precautionary measure, have 
become challenges that ICT4Ag initiatives are currently confronted with. The use of  ICT4Ag as a tool to scale-up and create high level niche markets is thus faced with institutional and 
governance challenges. Whilst there is the need to lobby 
 
governments and decision makers to make 
explicit policies that enhance and encourage the utilisation of, and investment in ICT4Ag, such policies should look at how investments in the use of  e.g. drones for agriculture can help 
enhance, as well as improve agricultural value 
chains in ACP countries. The creation and enactment of  policies and frameworks that include these considerations, can thus help address current challenges.
Inadequate ICT policies and  
regulations 
Regulations that enhance the design, use, and adoption of  ICT4Ag technologies in many ACP countries seem non-existent, or not fully created in the statute books or legal frameworks for most 
developing countries. This serves as a 
disincentive for investors who may not feel protected when investing in ICT4Ag businesses.
Most ACP countries also lack formalised legal 
frameworks that govern ICT4Ag initiatives and 
investment portfolios. Therefore, it is very difficult to grant incentives for investment in ICT-related agricultural business models. Interestingly , many policy-related actions have 
been taken by international organisations and 
governments like FAO, the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank and CARICOM, etc. across the developing world. FAO, as an example, has identified in its 
framework the following main actors and 
stakeholders that ought to be considered in e-agriculture initiatives: 
• Government ministries and regulators, such as ICT/telecommunications, finance, commerce, e-governance 
agencies, rural development and other sector regulators (banking, insurance, disaster management, etc.)
• Mobile network operators/TSPs
• Non-agriculture research organisations
• Industry associations (e.g. ICT, banking, etc.)
• Financial institutions (banks, insurance companies, micro-finance institutions (MFIs)
• National statistics bureaus 
• NGOs/INGOs working outside agriculture in sectors that impact agriculture
• Arbitration authorities
• Media
Source: Stakeholder Identification FAO Framework on E-Agriculture42
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Challenges of ICTs in agriculture
Whilst the above framework includes ICT experts 
and the business environment, it is evident that 
direct business investors and entrepreneurs have 
not been highlighted as important stakeholders to 
engage. As many countries have adapted the FAO framework in their national policy documents on ICT4D/Ag, they are again not highlighted within the national frameworks. The 
information provided in the e-agriculture 
framework above presents interesting areas for discussion on politics and governance. 
Interviews with experts and practitioners from 
the ICT4Ag field of  enquiry (i.e. researchers, service providers, start-ups, policy officers and NGOs) highlighted the lack of  collaboration among ICT4Ag product/service developers, 
which according to them is a major challenge 
that needs to be urgently addressed. Global 
application designers need to network to learn 
from each other and build on knowledge that has already been developed by others. Donor driven organisations have created boot camps across the developing world to initiate joint start-up projects 
and start-up businesses. The outcome of  such 
has seen the establishment of  ICT4Ag companies like mFisheries, Agrinfo-Tanzania, Esoko and Farmerline, and whilst these new businesses have experienced mixed successes and challenges, most have reached the level of  scaling-up.
Vand Zila Technology
This is an ICT for development company that works in the education, health and agriculture sectors in Ghana 
for the past 8 years. Currently, this service provider is a lead facilitator for mapping social entrepreneurs in Ghana on behalf of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation. The company 
identified the main challenge in ICT4Ag to hover around the lack of information and knowledge that farmers 
can use to improve production, yield, as well as information on market. The CEO of the company further noted that the current wave of intervention on ICT4Ag centres on activities introduced by international organisations. This to him will need private sector investments to help scale up, as well as yield profit. 
‘...There are limited investments by investors and entrepreneurs to take advantage of the current wave of 
ICT4Ag activities on going in Ghana and the developing world.... There is the need for a lot of stakeholders that cuts around business and policy to lead the mission to help start-up companies scale to reach their potentials...‘[Maxwell Vand Zila, CEO Vandzila Technology Ltd]. 
Mr. Vand Zila further noted that local and foreign investments are needed to take advantage of the 
many opportunities that hover around ICT4Ag in the area of data storage, management and access, as well as provision of services and products that can help improve the ICT4Ag business model across developing economies. 
Source: Maxwell Vand Zila, CEO Vand Zila Technologies, January 2017
Synergy/policy 
recommendations
To unleash the full potential of  ICTs in 
development programs, a new level of  collaboration, both internally and with other organisations, and a new approach to scaling solutions to achieve a tangible impact are 
needed. This will necessitate significant 
coordination between INGOs, technology companies, private sector organisations, universities, and government entities (central and local), as well as with traditional development 
partners.It is incredibly difficult to conceive new ways of  working with organisational constructs that are 
fundamentally different from the status quo and require a shift in terms of  strategy , competence, skills, and organisational structure.
Investment drives for the increased participation 
of  entrepreneurs and investors in ICT4Ag 
initiatives and business models, entail that there 
is the need for governments and initiators to involve such actors’ from conceptualisation, through to the development, testing, and review. This will create added interest, zeal and passion 
in the projects from such actors, and encourage 
them to invest at the time of  scale-up. REFERENCES
43
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?References
Agbeko et al (2017) Corporate Social 
Responsibility strategies adopted by Micro 
Finance Institutions. A case study in corporate social responsibility in Challenging 
times, Springer international publishing.
Agwu, A., Ekwueme, J., & Anyanwu, A. (2008). 
Adoption of  improved agricultural 
technologies disseminated via radio farmer programme by farmers in Enugu State, Nigeria. African journal of  biotechnology , 7(9).
Aina, L. O. (2012). The information 
environment of  agricultural stakeholders in Botswana. Information Development, 28(2), 149-159. doi: 10.1177/0266666911433117 
Asenso-Okyere, K., & Mekonnen, D. A. (2012). 
The importance of  ICTs in the provision of  information for improving agricultural productivity and rural incomes in Africa. African Human Development Report. 
UNDP Sponsored research Series.
Best, M. L., & Maier, S. G. (2007). Gender, 
culture and ICT use in rural south India. 
Gender, Technology and Development, 11(2), 
137-155.
Calandro, E., Gillwald, A., Moyo, M., & Stork, 
C. (2010). Towards Evidence based ICT 
Policy and Regulation: Comparative Sector 
Performance Review 2009/2010. Policy 
Paper, 5.
Duncombe, R., & Heeks, R. (2005). Information 
& Communication Technologies (ICTs), 
Poverty Reduction and Micro, Small & 
Medium-scale Enterprises (MSMEs). A framework for understanding ICT applications for MSMEs in developing countries.
Eldon, M. (2005). ICT in Kenya, where are we 
now. Regional e-governance programme: progress from Tanzania. Paper presented at the 2nd EAC Regional Consultative Workshop.
Gillwald, A., Milek, A., & Stork, C. (2010). 
Gender assessment of  ICT access and usage in Africa. Towards Evidence-based ICT Policy and Regulation, 1(5). Gilwald, A., Milek, A., & Stork, C. (2010). 
Gender Assessment of  ICT Access and Usage in Africa. Research ICT Africa, Volume One. Policy Paper, 5.
Hafkin, N., & Odame, H. (2002). Gender, ICTs 
and agriculture. A situation analysis for the 5th Consultative Expert Meeting of  CTA ’s ICT Observatory meeting on gender and agriculture in the information society .
Harrison, B. (2005). Information and 
communication technology policy in Rwanda. Case Study . Retrieved on December, 20(2014), 35-57.
Huyer, S. (2003). Gender, ICT , and education. 
Engendering ICT: Ensuring Gender Equality in ICT for Development.
Isabirye, N., Flowerday , S. V ., Nanavati, A., & 
von Solms, R. (2015). Building technology 
trust in a rural agricultural e-marketplace: A 
user requirements perspective. Electronic Journal of  Information Systems in Developing Countries, 70(1), 1-20. 
Lwakabamba, S. (2005). The development of  
ICTs in Rwanda: pioneering experiences. At the crossroads: ICT policy making in East Africa, 213-224.
Mabe, L., & Oladele, O. (2012). Use of  
Information Communication Technologies tools among Extension officers in the North-West Province, South Africa. Life Science Journal, 9(4). 
Munyua, H., & Adera, E. (2009). Emerging ICTs 
and their potential in revitalizing small-scale agriculture. Agricultural information worldwide, 2(1), 3-9. 
Muto, M., & Yamano, T . (2009). The impact of  
mobile phone coverage expansion on market participation: Panel data evidence from Uganda. World Development, 37(12), 1887-1896.
Patel D. J, Shukla K. K. (2014) Challenges and 
Opportunities for ICT Initiatives in Agricultural Marketing in India. Orient. J. Comp. Sci. and Technology; 7(3) December 2014.REFERENCES
44
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Rahman, M., Panda, S., & Tofazzal Islam, M. 
(2012). Technology developments in 
Bangladesh and higher education through 
ODL Effectively Implementing Information 
Communication Technology in Higher Education in the Asia-Pacific Region (pp. 273-293): Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Saravanan, R. (2010). ICTs for agricultural 
extension: Global experiments, innovations and experiences: New India Publishing.
Scott, N., Garforth, C., Jain, R., Mascarenhas, 
O., & McKemey , K. (2005). The economic impact of  telecommunications on rural livelihoods and poverty reduction: a study of  
rural communities in India (Gujarat), 
Mozambique and Tanzania.
Utulu, S. C. A. (2014). Mobile phone and 
development: Synthesis on new misuse 
perspective ICTs and the millennium development goals: A United Nations 
perspective (pp. 101-125): Springer US.
Wabwoba, F ., Wanyembi, G. W ., & Omuterema, 
S. (2012). Barriers to implementation of  
green ICT in Kenya. International Journal of  Science and Technology , 2(12), 823-836. 
Online resources
http://ictforag.org/themes/ (Accessed, 20th 
October, 2016)
http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/10/high-tech-
high-yields-caribbean-farmers-reap-benefits-of-ict/ (Accessed, 21st October, 2016)
http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/10/high-tech-
high-yields-caribbean-farmers-reap-benefits-of-ict/ (Accessed, 21st October, 2016)
http://caribbean.cepal.org/content/ict-
agriculture (Accessed, 21st October, 2016)
https://www.adb.org/sectors/ict/ict-in-key-
sectors/agriculture (Accessed, 21st October, 2016)http://www.e-agriculture.org/content/cta-
working-pape-drone-governance-scan-policies-laws-and-regulations-governing-use-
unmanned (Accessed, 24th October, 2016)
http://www.kauffman.org/what-we-do/
research/2014/04/agtech-challenges-and-
opportunities-for-sustainable-growth 
(Accessed, 31st January , 2017)
https://www.devex.com/news/the-five-key-
challenges-in-implementing-ict-for-
development-82499 (Accessed, 31st January , 
2017)APPENDIx
45
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Appendix
The following are summaries published by CTA 
and its partners, on the status of  Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) rules and regulations in African countries published by CTA. UAVs are defined as aircrafts without pilot (http://www.theuav.com/).
Table 2. Status of UAV rules and regulations in African countries, as of April 2016
Status Countries
In place Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa
Pending Mauritius, Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
None Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Comoros, Congo (Dem. Rep.), Congo (Rep.), Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, 
Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda 
Table 3. Status of UAV rules and regulations in Caribbean countries, as of April 2016
Status Countries
In place Barbados, Belize, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad
Pending The Bahamas, Grenada and Suriname
None Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Haiti, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines
Table 4. Status of UAV rules and regulations in Pacific countries, as of April 2016
Status Countries
In place Fiji
Pending None
None Cook Islands, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Fed. St., Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua 
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor Leste (East Timor), Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu 46
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
CHAPTER 4 
1 Rutten, L. (28 July 2016) Skype interview. 
2 A wicked problem is a problem that is difficult or impossible to solve because of  incomplete, contradictory , and changing 
requirements.Areas of investment
Introduction
While mobile penetration at the genesis of  
ICT4Ag a decade ago was low, mobile networks 
in emerging economies currently reach 90% of  the 
population and mobile phone ownership will be 
over 90% of  adults by 2020 (Manyika et al., 2016). 
In the meantime, internet of  things (IoT) sensors “will grow from 13.4 billion in 2015 to 38.5 billion by 2020” enabling “a global digital mesh yielding a planetary nervous system reaching into individuals, their homes and communities” (Ibaraki, 2015). Within Africa, there will be 500 million 
smartphones by 2020 (Shier et al., 2016) further 
accelerating the use of  precision agriculture and other technologies and for which “partnerships and collaboration (will be) critical for ecosystem development” (Matich, 2016). The combination of  
these mobile and sensor technologies will create a 
global IoT market worth US$11.1 trillion by 2025 (Manyika et al., 2015) within which will be the deployment of  precision agriculture. In addition, Christine Lagarde, managing director of  the International Monetary Fund, states that “virtual 
currencies could be extremely beneficial to reach 
out to people who live in very remote areas” (Valero, 2016). These mobile, sensor, digital/virtual currencies and numerous other technologies will be powerful tools for helping to 
solve ‘wicked problems’ in agriculture. 
Despite the rapid growth in ICT4Ag initiatives, 
the deployment of  the majority of  solutions is still at a pilot stage, with few capable of  scaling 
sustainably (CTA, 2016). Many initiatives have 
been solely supported by donors and foundations and have provided tremendous ‘proof  of  concept’ evidence, yet they still need continued support. Agriculture’s transformation across 
Africa therefore requires the “design of  new 
models for investment to engage the private sector” (Mayaki, 2016). 
To accommodate future scaling of  ICT4Ag 
applications and platforms, the private sector 
must invest in ICT4Ag initiatives. However, there 
is a structural problem in the ICT4Ag sector 
because there are currently very few such 
investments being made.
1 This structural problem is the dearth of  ICT4Ag CSPs to 
coordinate new investment models that deliver 
digital solution sets into rural areas. As stated by 
FAO et al. (September 2015), “many e-agriculture pilot projects are not implemented in a coordinated way and are not sustainable. Mainstreaming e-agriculture initiatives has been challenging in many countries because of  a lack of  a clear strategy and a failure to create synergies with other sectors” (p. 3).
ICT4Ag CSPs require a systems theory 
approach to problem solving by promoting investments and “innovations in technology , 
human capacity and organisational/network 
design” (Peterson, 2013), which will lead to sustainability . At the same time, Peterson (2013) defines agriculture sustainability as “simultaneous demands for economic feasibility (profit), benign environmental impact (planet), 
and enhanced social outcomes (people).” CSPs 
are therefore about bringing together new stakeholders who “engage with each other to co-create new knowledge, connect and enhance values, and collectively learn their way to new 
priorities” (Peterson, 2013) rather than 
exchanging what they already know. In addition, according to Dentoni et al. (2016), “by interacting with multiple stakeholders and tackling wicked problems,
2 organisations mitigate and share risks, 
which in the long run increases their chances of  survival.” Or, as stated by Blok et al. (2013), “the involvement of  multiple stakeholders is a 
necessary condition to promote sustainability 
and economic independence of  the small-scale farmers, and profit enterprises have a leading role to play” (p. 41). As such, ICT4Ag CSPs provide a framework for the co-creation of  new 
investment options and opportunities for each 
partner while mitigating each partner’s risk. 
To achieve an integrated approach that is woven 
into the fabric of  core business operations, 
traditional thinking must transition beyond ‘hard’ constraints – such as applications and platforms, devices and network connectivity – and the notion that ICT4Ag is an ‘application’, 
and instead focus investments and attention on 47
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
the challenge of  ‘soft’ constraints – such as 
market research, business analysis, requisite 
internal change management policies and 
procedures, management/staff buy-in, internal 
and external awareness, and education. As hard constraints have been mitigated by increasing mobile phone uptake, as well as increased network and internet connectivity , soft 
constraints have emerged as the key for the 
successful implementation of  ICT4Ag initiatives. Investments to address the soft constraints also align with rapidly emerging megatrends
3 
germane to agriculture, such as CSPs. 
To introduce pathways to institutionalise the use 
of  ICT4Ag, and seamlessly inject these into an organisational culture – or corporate DNA
4 – of  
global, regional and local agribusinesses and 
other stakeholders that lead CSPs, this chapter provides a three-step framework for investment, 
and describes the types of  investments within 
each step for each type of  partner in a CSP (farmer, agribusiness, donor/foundation, financial institution, etc.).
Three-step framework
To mitigate hard and soft constraints for successful ICT4Ag schemes, there are three steps 
3 Megatrends include: Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), growth of  mobile phone uptake, IoT , big data analytics (finance, 
supply chain, traceability , etc.), precision agriculture, cloud computing, blockchain decentralised ledger technology , machine-to-machine learning, crops adapted to withstand the effects of  climate change, and a shortage of  qualified ICT professionals in agriculture (GIC Directors, 2015).
4 As with a living organism, corporate DNA encodes the genetic instructions for the behaviour and business operations of  private 
sector companies. or areas of  investment recommended for 
pre-project, project formulation and project 
implementation:
1. Feasibility study , research and analysis; 
2. Formation of  CSPs with selected agricultural 
actors and integration of  the ICT4Ag 
initiative into internal operations of  all 
relevant entities, including agribusinesses, mobile network operators (MNOs), financial institutions, and local technology solution providers; and
3. Implementation of  ICT4Ag into payment systems, marketing, agriculture extension, 
supply chain management and other 
programmes by way of  awareness raising and training for agribusinesses, farmers and other stakeholders. 
These three key steps for investment have also been highlighted by the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a requisite for leveraging the capacities and capabilities of  
individual private, public and civil society 
partners. To do this, CSPs first have to be understood within the context of  the 
 
agriculture sector.48
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Building on a 20th century management approach 
A worthy analogy for comparing the integration of ICT4Ag into agribusinesses and CSPs is the integration 
of total quality management (TQM)5 into industrial manufacturing within the automobile and steel industries 
– a process that dates back to the Second World War in Japan. 
TQM played an integral part in Japan’s efforts to rebuild its economy in the aftermath of the Second World 
War and altered perceptions regarding quality of production and Japan’s competitiveness as it sought 
to reverse the moniker that ‘Made in Japan’ was indicative of inferior quality. The key differentiator that 
influenced the resurgence of Japan’s competitiveness was the disciplined focus on the end user – the same mantra often preached by those tailoring ICT4Ag solutions to smallholder farmers – and after about a decade, Japan’s concerted effort to produce high-quality and customer-centered automobiles and steel began to threaten the economic viability of the booming auto and steel industries in America. 
Losing market share and their competitive edge against Japan, corporate and sector clusters across the 
US and Western Europe began to weave TQM processes and procedures into the fabric of their core businesses processes, standard procedures and business cultures. In no time, the benefits stemming from 
an increase in intensive training for line workers, listening to customers and consumers, and calculating 
decisions based on their desires and needs were immediate. 
Since the Second World War, developments, iterations, practices and procedures linked to TQM have 
altered the trajectory for countless industries. For instance, the acceptance and proliferation of TQM 
ushered in a new era of rigorous oversight in terms of a business’ ability to assess the costs of quality.
6 
Building on TQM, several other tools emerged. The emergence of the DMAIC tool (Define, Measure, Analyse, Improve/install and Control), for example, has informed industry’s ability to improve planning, controls, measurement and analyses, and installation processes, while the quality management maturity 
grid (Crosby, 1980) sharpened the readiness of a corporate environment along a 5-point scale – 
uncertainty, awakening, enlightenment, wisdom and certainty. 
Unfortunately for ICT4Ag, despite its proven utility, there have been few initiatives that have scaled 
successfully, largely due to deficiencies in business and deployment processes, and team composition. Cost 
analysis, DMAIC, corporate assessment and other TQM tools should therefore be reviewed by the ICT4Ag community to continue to develop the ICT4Ag space. 
5 TQM is a management approach to long-term success through customer satisfaction, i.e. all members of  an organisation 
participate in improving processes, products, services and the culture in which they work. 
6 Cost of  quality: the costs associated with providing poor quality products or services, including failure (costs as a result of  defects 
before and after the customer received the product or service), appraisal costs (costs incurred to determine the degree of  conformance to quality requirements), and prevention (costs incurred to keep failure and appraisal costs to a minimum).ICT4Ag CSPs in theory
A significant topic of  discussion during the 2015 
G20 Roundtable on Innovation in Agricultural Finance (Antalya, Turkey , 2015) was about the need for CSPs between agribusinesses, MNOs, 
financial institutions, software solution providers, 
NGOs, governments and others to bundle agriculture digital payments together with ICT4Ag. A CTA report on digital payments in agriculture (Babcock, 2015) identified several 
critical components that are also germane to 
broader ICT4Ag models including: the need to form intelligence-driven CSPs built around extensive market research; and mobilising shared resources to promote awareness, education and adoption among farming 
communities and other stakeholders.
The formation of  CSPs that aggregate partner 
capacities and capabilities are essential to help solve wicked problems in agriculture (Dentoni, Hospes & Ross, 2012). Wicked problems are numerous and highly complex and include, how to feed 2+ billion more people by 2050, the chronic poverty of  smallholder farmers that 
produce 70% of  food worldwide, food insecurity , 
impacts of  climate change on crop production, child labour, environmental degradation, and biodiversity loss. Such wicked problems require companies to “take actions with a diverse set of  
stakeholders both inside and outside the supply 
chain at levels that have been uncommon in the agri-food sector,” yet “agribusiness managers do not always recognise that these are wicked problems that require not only adoption of  technological innovations but also organisational 
change management” (Dentoni, et al., 2012). 
Unfortunately , agriculture CSPs have not been 
studied in agribusiness or general business 49
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
literature (Dentoni & Peterson, 2011). As the 
body of  research and evidence grows, concepts 
become proven and the expanded role of  
ICT4Ag in CSPs is tested, the notion that 
ICT4Ag is about the use of  individual applications will be overcome. A mindset that ICT4Ag is a multi-disciplinary , systems approach to streamlining, professionalising, and 
7 A CED is a person in charge of  community management who oversees partnerships and dynamics within a specific industry .commercialising a connected and digitised 
agricultural supply chain by way of  bundled 
functionalities that enhance the value proposition 
of  agricultural goods, must be adopted. This 
needs to be accepted by all stakeholders in order to advance the ICT4Ag movement and the role of  CSPs in addressing the SDGs. 
Figure 5: ICT4Ag CSP balance between people/partners, process and technology
Source: Adapted from Bell (2006)
Figure 5 illustrates the optimal balance required between people, technology and process to maintain effective ICT4Ag CSPs.  
While a CSP must agree on its vision and goals 
from the outset, as well as its business plan, there must be some level of  flexibility to provide room for the CSP to adapt to evolving interests throughout the project’s lifecycle. Each partner 
requires clear roles and responsibilities aligned 
with their self-assessment of  strengths, weaknesses and capabilities. Dedicated personnel are also required, one of  whom should be designated as the chief  ecosystem director 
(CED).
7 A senior-level position, the CED’s 
knowledge base should be strongly founded in 
agribusiness, but also extend to general business, development and technology , and project and change management – all areas that will enable them to effectively develop and manage 
competing interests, ever-shifting priorities, and 
bring order to controlled chaos and mutually equitable benefits for each of  the partners involved (London, 2016). Effective CEDs will demonstrate a balance of  strategic decision-
making ability , diplomatic yet decisive 
negotiation skills, and business acumen to foresee change, manage expectations, and capture results to articulate strengths and weaknesses among 
CSPs as initiatives evolve.
For the CSP to pursue its shared vision and 
goals, there must be an agreed upon monitoring, 
evaluation and learning (ME&L) process that will be used during implementation. A series of  checklists and systems must be in place that 
People/partners
Technology
 Process50
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
capture rich supply chain data and provide deep 
insight and analytics to facilitate decision-
making by the CSP as well as by each of  its 
partners. For example, emerging from the 
growing call for better performance measurement is the impact assessment framework (IAF) (London, 2009). The IAF measures the negative and positive impacts of  
changed economics, behaviours and 
relationships between private sector buyers, farmers and the communities with whom they interact. As the bundling of  ICT4Ag functionalities continues to evolve (see text box below) and multi-sectoral platforms emerge that aggregate agriculture together with health, education and other sectors (Babcock, 2015c), 
robust investment in IAF and similar tools will 
8 Shrader, L., Madara, A., Hokans, J., Stephen, O., Gatabaki, S., Makau, E. (8 August 2016). Personal interview. 
9 https://www.esoko.com/
10 http://www.mercycorpsafa.org/be critical for comprehensive performance 
measurement(s). 
From performance measurement tools, to 
establishing governance and management structures that rely on key personnel to drive the vision and goals of  the CSP forward, there is an overarching need for sound systems, approaches, 
and processes. To that end, a farmer-centred 
focus must be maintained as part of  a broader, more ‘systems theory’ approach that recognises the inherent value brought into the CSP by its partners. Linking the voice of  the farmer with business processes (as well as moving cash around to pay them) is ultimately the main concern of  agribusinesses.
8 
Bundled ICT4Ag platforms
An outcome of CTA’s seminal ICT4Ag conference in Rwanda in 2013, and its subsequent work in the 
sector, is a realisation of the need for a cohesive vision for the development and deployment of platforms that incorporate a range of functionalities in order to avoid duplication and to maximise value. The 
need for bundled ICT4Ag platforms must be aligned with the requisite three key steps of investment. A 
comprehensive list of functionalities include: digital payments/finance, surveillance, marketing, agriculture extension and supply chain management. The strategic insertion of digital payments and finance into agriculture supply chains addresses a key inefficiency – the expensive, non-transparent and inconvenient 
use of cash by buyers to pay farmers. Enabling digital finance channels for the distribution and capture of 
value (e.g. payments, savings, credit, micro-insurance, etc.) is complementary to and enables the digital distribution and capture of information for surveillance, marketing, agriculture extension and supply chain management. 
This convergence of ICT4Ag functionalities has happened with well-known platforms, such as Esoko and 
Farmerline. In August 2016, the ICT service, Esoko,
9 entered into a US$868,000 CSP with the Alliance for 
a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) and the Mastercard Foundation to provide digital finance services for 
smallholder farmers. Others such as Farmerline in Ghana have recently reached agreements with MNOs to 
add bulk mobile money payment services to their platform.
ICT4Ag CSPs in practice
Mercy Corps’ AgriFin Accelerate10 (AFA) is an 
ideal model of  an ICT4Ag CSP . The 6-year $25 
million initiative, funded by the Mastercard Foundation, works in Kenya, Tanzania and 
Zambia, and supports the expansion of  digital 
financial services bundled with farm management information services to over 1 million farmers by orchestrating linkages with 
core partners (i.e. financial institutions, MNOs, 
etc.) and software solution partners. AFA has had the additional benefit of  learning from lessons as a result of  Mercy Corps’ previous Agri-Fin mobile project in Indonesia, Uganda and 
Zimbabwe. AFA ’s engagement model includes market 
research, selection of  partners for bundled ICT4Ag functionalities, farmer training and ME&L. AFA have well-defined selection criteria for projects they will orchestrate. They 
also have a highly structured due diligence 
process flow map for these selections that require go/no go decisions at the pre-due diligence, interim diligence and final diligence 
stages. AFA ’s highly structured approach is a 
worthy reference for any initiative to create one or more ICT4Ag CSPs.
In Uganda, CTA ’s €4.6 million Market-led 
User-owned ICT4Ag enabled Information 51
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Service (MUIIS) is another example of  a 
successful CSP . It brings multiple partners 
together11 to deliver bundled ICT4Ag 
functionalities across a network of  350,000 farmers along the maize, soybean and sesame 
value chains. MUIIS uses the Ensibuuko Mobile 
Banking and Information Service platform as a 
delivery channel. 
Another example of  a CSP is the United States 
Agency for International Development 
(USAID)/Vodafone Connected Farmer Alliance 
(CFA) which seeks to promote commercially sustainable mobile agriculture solutions and increase productivity and revenues for 500,000 farmers in Kenya, Tanzania and Mozambique. 
Created in 2012, CFA is a CSP between USAID, 
Vodafone, TechnoServe and various agribusinesses. CFA ’s ICT4Ag platform includes mobile payments, communications and data 
collation/management functionalities and is 
replicable across different agricultural value chains. It addresses value chain management inefficiencies and increases productivity of  both agribusinesses and smallholder producers. 
As part of  the CFA partnership, implemented by 
TechnoServe, a useful checklist
12 (TechnoServe et 
al., n.d.) for the CSP was compiled to ensure its 
effectiveness:
1. Is there a genuinely shared vision and set of  
goals?
2. Are there sets of  identified aims that all partners can articulate?
3. Is the purpose and role of  the CSP clear?
4. What skills and competencies are needed?
5. To whom will the CSP report? What does the reporting process look like?
6. Is there an accepted process for decision-making?
7. Is there an accepted performance management assessment framework?
Unfortunately , AFA, MUIIS and CFA CSPs are the exception rather than the rule in the ICT4Ag 
space. The lessons learned from these initiatives 
reveal worthy areas of  investment that are less about the technology and more about organisational change management and training within the context of  CSPs. These learnings 
inform the key areas of  investment by 
11 MUIIS Partners: CTA, Mercy Corps, aWhere Inc., AGRA, EARS-E2M, EAFF and eLEAF .
12 This informative guide specific to agribusiness adoption of  ICT , and MNO comprehension of  agriculture, considers 
impediments to selling mobile technology , technology adoption lifecycle, a matrix of  change, roles/responsibilities in change management and more.
13 http://www.technoserve.org/files/downloads/case-study-connected-farmer-alliance.pdf  agribusinesses, donors/foundations, financial 
institutions and other stakeholders. 
Similar learnings emerged from the performance 
evaluation (Babcock et al., 2016) of  the USAID/Malawi Mobile Money Accelerator Project (MMAP), which aimed to accelerate the development of  the digital payments ecosystem 
in Malawi. The programme linked a range of  
public and private initiatives into a coordinated set of  activities designed to promote broad adoption and use of  mobile money in Malawi.
MMAP carried out a number of  CSP pilots 
including four that were for agriculture. In the rush to secure farmer adoption of  mobile wallets and solutions, there was little regard for the need to have internal management and staff buy-in, as 
well as mobile wallet adoption by management, 
staff and field agents for disbursement of  salaries and allowances. There was also little or no analysis of  the underlying business case for how digital supply chain payments/information 
management would decrease costs, increase 
yields, improve quality and reduce spoilage. In addition, there was also little or no analysis of  the many benefits that directly accrue to farmers, as well as the financial and other benefits for 
agribusinesses. In one initiative, some of  the 
agribusiness field agents did not have a mobile wallet and yet they were trying to promote mobile wallet uptake by farmers!
These types of  shortfalls – lack of  management/
staff buy-in, internal adoption, business analysis 
and more – are not surprising given the rapid advance of  these types of  ICT4Ag CSPs. Nevertheless, we must close these gaps by investing in the requisite change management 
necessary to successfully implement ICT4Ag 
initiatives. 
While evaluating MMAP , Babcock et al., (2016) 
also briefly looked at Kenya Nut
13 which linked 
M-Pesa (mobile money transfer) payments and a farm management information system to 
farmers. Before the Kenya Nut pilot started, 
there had been no pre-project analysis of  cost savings, yet the post-project case study revealed cost savings of  US$228,000 for Kenya Nut. Such analysis pre-project might have helped the pilot 
to better align the awareness, education and 52
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
buy-in of  the management, staff and field agents 
for less problematic implementation. Such type 
of  pre-project analysis should lie within the first 
step of  the three-step framework.
A review by Vodafone (2015) of  six ICT4Ag 
initiatives14 revealed that: business plans must be 
developed based on market research, the most successful initiatives bundle functionalities, and investment is required to promote awareness and provide training. USAID’s Feed the Future 
(2014) also emphasised the importance of  the 
following areas of  investment: research, awareness raising, and education and training in order to mitigate risks related to market, product, financing, production and adoption. 
Three-step framework for 
investment
The three-step framework for investment is 
informed by CTA ’s previously developed three steps specific to agriculture digital payments (Babcock, 2015a). The three steps were: cash 
usage behavioural research, strategic alliance 
formation, and embedded mobile finance. CTA ’s previous work revealed that there must be pre-project investment in market research and analysis in order to inform an understanding of  
the patterns of  daily life of  farmers to include 
14 Reuters Market Light (India), Ndumberi Dairy receipting service (Kenya), Multiflower payment and loans service (Tanzania), 
ECOTAB (Turkey), RUDI Sandesha Vyavhar (India), and Vodafone Farmers Club (Turkey).their needs, wants and desires as well as their 
levels of  literacy , digital literacy and levels of  
trust (step one). Only with this understanding 
can value propositions be crafted to create viable 
CSPs (step two) so that digital solution set(s) can be successfully implemented and delivered to farmers (step three). 
Throughout the three-step framework (Table 5) 
are discreet tasks like research, analysis, design and delivery of  training. Of  greatest importance, though, from an investment perspective, is the need to build human capacity . It is clear from empirical evidence (GIC Directors, 2015; key informant interviews) that there is a particular shortfall of  ICT expertise within the agribusiness 
sector and the rest of  the agricultural 
community . Closely related to that is a shortfall in senior level CED professionals with project and change management experience. As with 
other C-level executives, a transformation of  the 
ICT4Ag sector requires a senior level professional with expertise in agribusiness, telecommunication, technology as well as development sectors. Agribusinesses, as well as MNOs, must prioritise investment in the building 
of  human capacity in order to maximise the 
benefit of  ICT4Ag for their respective bottom line profitability! 
Table 5: Three-step framework for investment
Step Rationale
Step 1: Feasibility study/
research/analysisThis step should include development of high-level operational models, high-level business cases and cost/revenue analysis, activity plans and implementation budgets. Having this information available allows a board 
of directors to give senior managers the remit to implement strategy, and 
enables them to be aware of and understand the opportunities and implications of implementation. All of these aspects are integral to securing internal 
management and staff buy-in. 
Step 2: Formation of CSP/integration into internal 
operationsStaff of each CSP partner should know the features and benefits of planned 
ICT4Ag implementation. Each CSP partner should know their role and 
responsibility as well as that of other partners. Requires internal change management.
Step 3: Implementation 
 
of ICT4Ag into services  
and programmingThe goal is for ICT4Ag to be integrated into the overall business operations of the agribusiness and other CSP partners. It is essential for staff/field agents to be trained and to champion adoption and uptake of ICT4Ag by farmers. Farmers and other stakeholders must be made aware of and educated about features and benefits of the ICT4Ag product and service. 53
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Step 1: Feasibility study/research/
analysis
This first step is absolutely vital but noticeably 
absent from almost all ICT4Ag initiatives to date! 
Consistent with the parameters of  an ICT4Ag 
CSP , and the roles and responsibilities of  its 
partners, an agribusiness and MNO must take 
the lead in conducting and analysing the research. Their efforts can be supported by donor or foundation investment in technical assistance. 
Data about the needs, wants and desires of  
smallholder farmers (understood through the lens of  their levels of  illiteracy , financial illiteracy, digital illiteracy and lack of  trust, relating specifically to digital agriculture solutions) must be understood. Such research will not only ensure the most appropriate bespoke 
design of  a bundled ICT4Ag solution for the 
farmer but will also inform the requisite business case and value proposition for each of  the partners in the CSP . Whether done together or separately , such research is comparable to the common practice of  value chain or market 
systems analysis that is often carried out to 
inform the design of  an agriculture development project. In fact, this research should be integrated into market system analysis. 
The research will convert farmer and farm data 
into information. From the perspective of  the ICT4Ag solution, though, that research information is merely data that must be mapped into the design of  the ICT4Ag solution in such a 
manner that the outcome of  the solution 
provides visibility into, and information about, the market system. 
Step 2: Formation of CSP/integration 
into internal operations 
Given their position throughout the agriculture 
and economic landscape, donor and foundation investors are well-positioned to initiate and aggregate a list of  potential CSP partners. Initial 
discussions and negotiations between potential 
partners will inform the subsequent formation of  an ICT4Ag CSP . While the initial lead on this can be the donor or foundation, by virtue of  the 
fact that it will be an agriculture CSP , the lead 
agribusiness must lead the CSP . If  this cannot occur, the donor may take the lead during the pre-formation phase, before handing leadership over to the agribusiness.
During the formation of  ICT4Ag platform, 
business analysis conducted in step one must be used and translated into system requirements by the technology service provider. Farmer and other stakeholder uptake can then be forecasted, the profit-related key performance indicators 
(KPIs) for the private sector partners (e.g. 
agribusiness, MNO, technology solution provider, etc.) and the beneficiary-related KPIs for development partners (e.g. government, NGOs) can be calculated and understood. Each partner 
must then reaffirm their commitment to the CSP . 
Step 3: Implementation of ICT4Ag 
into services and programming
It is clear from empirical evidence (Accion, 2015; 
Babcock et al., 2016; Moceviciuten and Babcock, 2016; Waruingi and Muriithi, 2016) that the absence of  management and staff buy-in has been a shortfall in sustainable ICT4Ag initiatives. Buy-in comes from awareness of  – and 
education about – the features and benefits of  
ICT4Ag functionalities. This absence of  buy-in often originates from a lack of  internal business analysis of  the financial and other benefits (addressed by step one) that accrue not only to 
farmers but to the agribusiness and other 
stakeholders as well. 
With a more strategic approach of  the ICT4Ag 
CSP , business analysis will not only promote 
awareness amongst management of  all partners 
but will also inform the design of  training and curricula – about the digital solutions – that will be key to integrating the ICT4Ag platform into the corporate DNA of  the lead firm and other CSP partner/investors. Donor and foundation 
investors are well positioned to take the lead in 
the creation of  training/curricula – on financial and digital literacy – for corporate management/staff (e.g. agribusiness, MNO, etc.), farmers and field agents (e.g. corporate, government, NGOs). 
Their interest will be to create content that can 
be scaled to similar value chains as well as be collated for public consumption worldwide. Global, regional or local agribusiness and MNOs will also have interest in extracting specific 
content that can be customised for their 
awareness raising and training needs, and codified into their internal standard operating procedures for the other value chains and 
countries they work in.
In addition, implementation of  ICT4Ag 
platforms will leverage existing government and/or private-sector infrastructure that supports 
knowledge transfer about good agricultural 
practices. This knowledge transfer happens on 
an on-going, season-after-season basis because 
knowledge advances require constant 54
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
reinforcement to promote farmer uptake. 
Therefore, one of  the aims of  the CSP is to 
ensure that information about the ICT4Ag 
functionalities are weaved into existing 
knowledge transfer infrastructure.
Within the scope of  any ICT4Ag CSP vision will 
be the expansion of  an existing, or development 
of  a new, network of  field agents for the transfer 
of  knowledge, including knowledge about ICT4Ag. The integration of  an ICT4Ag into a CSP framework can further boost these efforts, while increasing its impact and creating pathways for the inclusion of  more youth and women into these knowledge transfer initiatives. 
The anchor agribusiness and MNO investors will 
also need to collaborate to identify potential agents such as input suppliers, cooperatives, traders, processors, and agri-equipment vendors. 
Existing and future distribution channels of  
products and services in areas where farmers live and work also need to be developed. These distribution channels will need to supply mobile money and other ICT/mobile functionalities. In the case of  mobile money , potential agents must 
comply with an MNO’s selection criteria. 
Investment matrix 
What follows is a mapping of  various options for 
investment by different types of  investors: agribusiness, cooperative, MNO, donor/foundation, technology solution provider, 
venture/social investor, financial institution and 
farmer. Further, the future of  ICT4Ag enabled by the three-step framework and mapping of  investment options by type of  investor will no doubt spawn multiple new business models and 
‘spin offs’ that will benefit farmers and their 
households in terms of: new distribution channels for products and services, micro-payments (i.e. PAYGO solar), layaway plans,
15 
school tuition payments and more (Manyika et al., 2016). 
As the CSP is formed, and the roles and 
responsibilities for each partner are designed, the words of  one key informant are instructive. According to Muchiri Nyaggah,
16 Executive 
Director at the Local Development Research Institute, “technology is pain relief ” for a headache. Therefore, the investment into, and 
15 A layaway plan is a retail sales promotion scheme under which a customer deposits a fraction of  the cost of  the merchandise 
they want but cannot buy . The store then holds the merchandise until a certain date by which time the customer must complete the payment and then take delivery .
16 Nyaggah, M. (9 August 2016). Personal interview. implementation of, a solution must match the 
perceived level of  financial pain – caused by 
inefficient supply chain, fraudulent behaviour, 
poor yields – with the requisite level of  investment 
in an ICT4Ag solution. In other words, the CSP in the aggregate and its individual partners must determine if  the ICT4Ag ‘headache’ requires investment in “a medical prescription, general 
practitioner or a neurologist”. 
Investment options/
considerations by type of 
investor
Type of investor: Farmers
Farmers have heard about mobile solutions but 
facts and figures about how much these solutions might benefit them financially have not been widely available. The value proposition for the 
farmer is that the technology is free, or subsidised 
(within a corporate business model), and makes their life easier while increasing their overall farm income. Their investment metrics will include: convenience, transparency , increased 
production and increased income. 
Research with smallholder farmers in Niger 
revealed feelings of  empowerment from ICT4Ag solutions that provided them with security and 
independence. Farmers greatly valued the 
independence that mobile payments gave them because they saved 1–3 hours on time spent traveling or waiting for payments (Aker et al., 2015). Citing an appreciation for security , a 
mobile survey conducted with USAID/
Vodafone’s CFA pilot with Kenya Nut revealed that 85% of  nut farmers in Kenya valued M-Pesa payments over cash, which is often paid out at crowded aggregation points. Echoing this 
preference for “increased privacy that mitigates 
community and social pressures to give loans and gifts” (Babcock, 2015), rice farmers in Ghana, who were paid with TigoCash, also highlighted this inherent benefit of  mobile payments.
Despite the potential benefits, the financial 
capacity and behaviour of  farmers indicates that they will not, themselves, pay for ICT4Ag (GSMA, 2015). As such, investment into sustainable ICT4Ag will benefit from moving 
higher up the value chain to other stakeholders 
with investment capacity and who will benefit 55
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
directly by linking with farmers. While there is a 
shortage of  research, studies are increasingly 
pointing to how producers prioritise investments. 
Having long endured protracted periods of  food 
insecurity , impoverished farmers often exhibit short-term focused behaviour patterns. As a result, farmers are less likely to sacrifice income in the short-term that would allow them to cover 
ICT4Ag subscription costs even if  it would 
benefit their farm business in the long-term. Many farmers also have limited capacity to invest in an ICT4Ag, favouring long-term investment in input supplies, with remaining funds invested in short-term food and other immediate needs. 
Lutheran World Relief  (LWR) found this 
short-term behaviour pattern to be the case in their programmes with Esoko and the Grameen Foundation Community Knowledge Worker 
(CKW) projects in Kenya and Uganda. Esoko 
provides smallholders with access to inputs and finance through a virtual marketplace, in addition to crop advice and information on prices and weather. Meanwhile, in Uganda, CKW combined the use of  mobile technology 
and local peer advisors to produce accurate, 
timely information to improve farmers’ businesses and livelihoods. Spanning four separate Esoko and CKW projects, all of  which came to an end in 2016, LWR paid for the 
services (about US$2,400 per year for Esoko and 
about US$12,00 per year for CKW) in the absence of  farmer interest in doing so. While noting benefits throughout the lifespan of  each project, individual farmers were not willing to 
absorb the costs to maintain subscriptions with 
Esoko and CKW . 
Type of investor: Agribusiness
For transformation of  the ICT4Ag sector, the CSP must have the agribusiness as the anchor partner. While directly connecting farmers and other stakeholders into the supply chain, the 
digital solution set(s) will be designed by the CSP 
to align with the core business model of  the agribusiness. Given its leadership role and responsibility , the agribusiness must commit by 
way of  internal reallocation of  manpower 
resources and/or invest in hiring and/or developing key personnel as well as a CED to lead the CSP .
17 https://www.sap.com/ 
18 KYC is the process of  a business obtaining information to verify the identity of  its clients. KYC enables banks to prevent fraud, 
understand their customers better and manage risks. 
19 Nyaggah, M. (9 August 2016). Personal interview.There is a trend in agribusinesses to attempt to 
digitise supply chains. A key value proposition is 
to be the first to secure a competitive advantage 
by successfully implementing a bundled ICT4Ag 
solution set. Another value proposition is to make a direct connection with smallholder producers and otherwise streamline the efficiency of  their supply chain. Metrics will include: 
digitised farmer databases, reduced side-selling 
(increased loyalty), improved and faster decision-making, cost savings and increased profit. 
ICT4Ag can now provide real-time and accurate 
planning and forecasting, efficient bookkeeping, traceability , quality control, transactional overviews and more. Due to the nature of  ICT , 
these benefits can be made technically available 
to all stakeholders including: farmers, agribusinesses, traders and other stakeholders. To streamline the efficiencies and effectiveness of  
their supply chains, global agribusinesses are 
either building their own multi-functional farm management information platforms or sourcing ready-made platforms from technology service providers such as the global solution provider, SAP .
17 The functionalities of  these platforms 
might include: SMS receipts, digital ledgers for farmer financial management, issuance of  know-your-customer
18-compliant identity cards, 
delivery of  agronomic and other information, capture of  descriptive, diagnostic, predictive and 
prescriptive analytics, and digital payments. 
Unfortunately , according to Moceviciute and Babcock (2016), as well as Muchiri Nyagah,
19 
there is a lack of  senior level experience inside front line global, regional and local 
agribusinesses, cooperatives, aggregators and 
input suppliers of  ICT , preventing the adoption of  ICT4Ag into core business operations in order to drive organisational transformation. 
Regional or local agribusinesses might have 
fewer resources to build their own platform or source from a global technology service provider. Therefore, options for regional and local agribusinesses might include smaller, local 
technology service providers such as Farmerline, 
Esoko, Votomobile or ImageAd. The subscription fee structure for such platforms are usually tiered for varying number of  records (i.e. for 10,000, 5,000 or 1,000 farmers) and 
functionalities (i.e. surveys, information 
distribution, traceability , payments, etc.). The 56
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
selection of  the appropriate fee structure is 
determined after a process that usually entails an 
initial product demonstration by the technology 
service provider. After learning about the 
potential customer’s business and its needs, the technology service provider then submits a specifications proposal. Upon review, the potential customer might ask clarification 
questions. Thereafter, precise terms are 
negotiated and the contract is signed. 
Throughout this process, the agribusiness should 
be proactive and as clear as possible regarding its aims and objectives to avoid confusing an already complicated process (Figure 6). 
Figure 6: A complicated process.
Available at: https://image-store.slidesharecdn.com/319f280c-5de4-4363-bc0b-af264a3f4932-original.jpeg
Whether designed internally , or a subscription is paid for use of  an off-the-shelf  platform, the agribusiness will own the underlying data. In both cases, the data can be securely stored in the 
cloud. If  internally designed, then the 
agribusiness must also commit the requisite investment to conduct ongoing maintenance and upgrades throughout the life of  the platform. As this is usually outside the core capability of  an agribusiness, it is very likely that ICT4Ag technology service providers – both global and 
local firms – will continue to expand because the 
cloud offers the same or more degree of  control over the data than any internal design/build. 
57
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
In the case of British American Tobacco (BAT)20 in Uganda in 2011, they sought to streamline their supply 
chain by partnering with banks to transition cash payments to 25,000 farmers to electronic payments into 
farmer bank accounts. At that time, mobile money and other solutions were not as ubiquitous as they are 
today so this BAT initiative was not bundled with any other ICT4Ag functionalities. Extensive research they 
carried out with farmers after each of the five pilots (with five different banks) revealed that small-scale fraud by their employees, which had occurred through the cash payment system, was costing BAT and its farmers about US$250,000 per season. This small-scale fraud occurred at the three points: field agents 
registering farmers, tobacco buyers awarding fraudulent quality certification, and payment cashiers miss 
counting or otherwise taking advantage of the farmer. 
After the five pilots in 2011, BAT rolled out electronic payments in 2012 in partnership with Post Bank. To 
open each of the 25,000 bank accounts required a US$1.5 investment; the requisite photo for each farmer 
required an additional US$1.20 investment. BAT also invested in a software development firm as well as developing very precise standard operating procedures for the integration of electronic payments into BAT’s core business operations. BAT also invested in extensive training to every farmer before each season. 
Due to the US$250,000 fraud, the scheme paid for itself in 2 years rather than the 5 years originally 
estimated by removing the leakage through electronic payments.
20 Elphinstone, A. (2 September 2016). Skype interview. Type of investor: Agriculture  
cooperative
Cooperatives with a mandate to serve their 
members know that there are multiple digital technologies and applications that will 
revolutionise agriculture. A key investment option 
for a cooperative is to hire key personnel and/or build capacity of  skills/knowledge in ICT . These personnel will be key to integrating the cooperative into upcoming ICT4Ag CSP initiatives. Farmers are increasingly aware of  mobile money in urban areas and are driving demand for mobile money in agriculture as well. Cooperatives need to be responsive to their members and ensure that ICT4Ag will improve 
delivery of  services and information. Metrics 
include: member satisfaction, indirect income for the cooperative as farmer income increases and increased membership. 
In Kenya and Uganda, LWR works with agriculture apex organisations and farmer groups in coffee, 
horticulture and grains to improve yields. As a development agency, LWR has a four-step approach to capacity building: policies and procedures, business planning, implementation and training. Using their 
four-step approach, LWR developed four projects that implemented either the Esoko or Grameen Foundation 
CKW information systems, as well as electronic weigh scales and electronic payments, for a coffee cooperative. In Uganda, LWR also provided a US$120,000 loan guarantee mechanism as their vote of confidence in the cooperatives when they sought financing. The mechanism provided a 60% guarantee for 
any financing the cooperative might secure. 
After conducting two or three ‘design workshops’ for the digital solution, the ICT4Ag designs were linked 
into a business plan. Thereafter, in the case of the Esoko, CKW and electronic weigh scale/payments, LWR 
worked to develop the human capacity of the cooperatives and their member farmers. As mapped out in 
the business plan, LWR provided 100% support in the first 2 years. In years 3–5, LWR expected the farmer organisation to provide 50%, 75% and 100% of the support, respectively. 
When working with Kenyan coffee societies to install electronic weigh scales they were met with internal 
resistance on the part of graders and purchasing clerks, however overcoming the resistance was manageable 
for two reasons: 1) the level of the corruption was so bad that farmers were outraged; and 2) LWR was 
already embedded in capacity building efforts at the coffee cooperative level so significant training was carried out to promote behaviour change and adoption. The use of electronic scales provided a transparent, summary print-out with details about payments due to each farmer. The coffee society chairman then took the 
print-out to the bank, which then made electronic payments into the bank account of each coffee farmer.
Farmer interest in paying for information services 
has not been enough to make them economically sustainable. Even though farmers might have derived benefit and see long-term value, their focus is on the immediate future. This dynamic has informed the shift in focus for ICT4Ag services 58
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
toward agribusinesses which have the financial 
capacity , and rapidly growing interest in bundled 
platforms, to streamline their supply chains. 
Within this context, agricultural cooperatives 
must determine what their role and responsibility should be. If  the cooperative has enough financial capacity , it might similarly prefer its own bundled 
ICT4Ag platform to streamline the supply chain 
on behalf  of  its member farmers. If  they don’t have enough financial capacity , cooperatives must recognise their significant contribution to the value chain by aggregating farmers, inputs and outputs. Therefore, to ensure its farmer members have maximum opportunity to participate in any ICT4Ag initiative, the cooperative should invest 
in a digital database of  its members. In addition, 
it should invest in developing and/or hiring its own internal ICT4Ag capacity to liaise with ICT4Ag initiatives. 
Type of investor: Donor/foundation
Development advocates want to understand how they might shift their role and responsibilities in this new era ICT4Ag CSP initiatives, which are 
SDG-endorsed and private sector-led. In the last 
decade, donors have played a key role in providing ‘proof  of  concept’ evidence ICT4Ag, but in the next decade, donors will provide more of  a ‘support’ role. Their options for investment 
in ICT4Ag CSP initiatives include market 
research, technical assistance, awareness raising, education and training. 
For donor agencies, the value proposition of  
ICT4Ag is that it can improve the quality of  life 
of  beneficiaries. Metrics include: numbers of  ‘connected’ farmers, numbers of  ‘financially included’ farmers, integration of  youth and women, increased transparency and the 
improved quality of  farmers’ livelihoods. 
The donor model is one of  development and 
empowerment of  trusted intermediaries whether they be in agriculture, health, education and other sectors. A donor’s convening authority and 
empowerment of  trusted intermediaries are 
strategic tools for the roll out of  ICT4Ag. MNOs have realised the importance of  partnering with intermediaries such as agribusinesses, farmers, cooperatives, NGOs and other actors in rural 
areas to leverage the relationships they have with 
21 Kleinbaum, D. (19 August 2016). Phone interview. 
22 IBID
23 Darkwa, D. (24 August 2016). Skype interview. 
24 Network orchestrators create a network of  peers in which the participants collaborate to create value.
25 Shrader,L., Madara, A., Hokans, J., Stephen, O., Gatabaki, S., Makau, E. (8 August 2016). Personal interview.farmers and to overcome challenges of  illiteracy 
and digital illiteracy . 
Intermediaries’ collaboration with, and the 
convening authority of, donors can and has promoted ICT4Ag awareness, education and trust amongst agricultural communities. For example, in Uganda, where there have been 
highly visible scandals related to cash 
disbursements of  donor aid, Dan Kleinbaum, CEO of  Beyonic – a mobile financial services provider – states, “66% of  USAID implementing partners have switched to the use of  mobile payments and probably half  of  those were motivated because of  cash leakage.”
21 In the case 
of  “one customer working in the agriculture sector, they suspected that some of  their agents were bribing farmers, but didn’t know just how 
much money they were losing. Once they 
switched internal payments to mobile money , they were able to eliminate these losses and their operations became far more efficient.”
22 
Separately , the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation funded an initiative, implemented by Vital Wave, in which several agribusinesses and 
exporters transitioned from making cash 
payments to bulk mobile money payments to their farmers and seasonal labourers. The funded pilots revealed the clear need for ongoing training of  internal personnel, as well as farmers, 
to overcome resistance due to a lack of  digital 
literacy . Ongoing training was also necessary to refresh knowledge, as well as provide training to new employees/farmers. In fact, according to Darkwa
23 agribusinesses “rarely accept the 
solution for its own sake” so training and retraining has to be offered by the solution provider to ease the institutionalisation of  the 
solution into the corporate culture.
The Mastercard Foundation-funded AgriFin 
Accelerator (AFA), implemented by Mercy Corps, plays a key role as a network orchestrator
24 
because MNOs and financial institutions do not understand farmers, agriculture and aggregation. 
AFA provides internal change management, 
management consulting, and research for the CSPs the network orchestrates.
25 For the 
partnerships and projects that AFA orchestrates, AFA requires an 80/20 cost share split with their private sector partners to digitise informational 59
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
access and payments to farmers. AFA projects 
can be as short as 3 weeks or as long as 6 months 
and the private sector partner must provide 80% 
of  the budget. In a departure from the past 
practice of  donors/foundations, AFA will not work with any ‘proof  of  concept’ projects; they only work with partners that are already bought in to the idea of  ICT4Ag. Therefore, any market 
research that AFA might support will be less 
about helping to build a case and more about understanding the demographic for which their partner is providing a product or service. 
While Mercy Corps is a non-profit, development 
implementer, AFA ’s successful performance as a network orchestrator can be attributed to the 
private sector agribusiness, MNO, financial 
institution and digital finance services backgrounds of  the AFA team members. These backgrounds have served the team well in 
gaining the credibility and respect of  their 
private sector partners. This includes working with their partners to secure non-disclosure agreements, craft a strategic approach, provide general advice, and guide partners’ internal change management to integrate ICT4Ag into 
core business operations. As stated by London 
(2016), the network orchestrator “must be fluent in the language of  the business community , including understanding what drives business 
26 Rutten, L. (28 July 2016). Skype interview. 
27 Asare-Kyei, D. (6 September 2016).  Personal interview.
28 Farmers typically lack market information leaving them disadvantaged in negotiations with traders and other actors for the sale 
of  their crop. 
29 Merz, C. (29 August 2016). Phone interview.
30 http://www.africancashewinitiative.org/ 
31 https://news.sap.com/sap-helps-barry-callebaut-realize-sustainable-cocoa-farming/ performance and how these enterprises measure 
success. He or she must also be fluent in the 
language of  the development community”. As 
previously stated, there is a shortfall of  
professionalism26, 27 in the ICT4Ag community 
which can be mitigated by engaging with more business professionals. 
Type of investor: Technology solution 
provider
Global, regional or local technology solution 
providers know that there are multiple digital 
technologies and applications that will 
revolutionise agriculture. Agriculture, though, is not a sector with which technology solution professionals are familiar. In addition, the depth 
and breadth of  agriculture can be a challenge for 
software design. A technology solution provider’s options for investment could include hiring key personnel with an agribusiness background. 
Technology solution providers must be profitable 
in order to remain in business. Bottom line metrics include: revenues, margins and profit by way of  serving the needs of  global, regional and 
local agribusinesses. Social venture metrics 
include: numbers of  farmers served (indirectly via paying agribusinesses) and mitigation of  information asymmetries
28 between farmers and 
other value chain stakeholders.   
The experience of global technology solutions provider, SAP, is a worthy reference.29 SAP Research was 
set up to leverage public funding from various sources (e.g. European Union, German ministries, etc.) to 
reduce risk for longer term initiatives with unknown profit potential. Accordingly, SAP Research became 
a partner in the African Cashew Initiative, which is now known as the Competitive Cashew initiative 
(ComCashew).30 This PPP is co-funded by Germany’s Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (BMZ) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. ComCashew has four implementing partners: the German development agency, Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Technoserve, the 
African Cashew Alliance (ACA) and FairMatch Support. In addition, ComCashew’s partners include the 
private sector, governments, donors, foundations and apex organisations. SAP designed a platform that supported organised farmers to streamline their business with traders, buyers, processors, retailers and wholesalers. The platform was able to utilise barcode tagging, electronic buying receipts, price and logistics 
information and multiple other applications. SAP also integrated a digital payments module (mobile money) 
onto the platform in Uganda. Although subsequent public funding of SAP Research has been reduced, SAP’s overall income has increased because its products – including the ComCashew platform – have 
proved the economic viability of serving these new markets. 
In Côte d’Ivoire, the SAP Rural Sourcing Management platform – which combines mobile and desktop 
access to track produce from the farm to the factory – has helped improve traceability and analysis within 
the cocoa value chain.
31 In the final analysis, the public funding provided a good ROI for the European 
Union as well as for SAP.60
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Global technology solution providers, such as 
SAP , design bundled turnkey solutions32 that are 
paid for by corporate and agribusiness 
customers. While locally grown technology 
solution providers initially focused on individual 
solutions (i.e. market pricing data) paid for by farmers, as the space has evolved in the past decade these local solution providers – that contribute their unique insights, nuanced 
understanding, local language capacity and 
commitment to impact – have evolved and now also provide bundled turnkey solutions. While the local technology solution providers now offer similar platforms those designed by global firms, 
they have been operational for longer than the 
global platforms. 
32 Also known as ‘off-the-shelf ’ solutions.
33 Churn is the loss of  customers to another company . One common practice is for mobile phone subscribers to have SIM cards 
from two or more MNOs and to switch between SIMs based on promotions and other incentives. A metric for a MNO is to have reduced churn by creating more customer loyalty so there is less switching of  SIMs (churn). 
34 Pshenichnaya, N. (25 August 2016). Skype interview. 
35 A vertical business is one that offers goods and/or services that are specific to a single industry , trade, profession or other group of  customers with specialised needs.Esoko and other for-profit local solution 
providers such as Farmerline and VotoMobile are smaller and nimbler than global platforms and are well-positioned to continue serving 
farmers, if  only as a loss leader in order to 
enhance their overall value proposition to corporate agribusiness customers. Local solution providers have lower costs, are closer to farmers, and are better able to provide them with free or 
subsidised services in order to build goodwill, 
understanding and a farmer database; all of  which can be leveraged in negotiations with agribusinesses. Herein lies a key competitive advantage for technology solution providers and 
justifies their internal investment and short-term 
losses in return for long-term investment gains. 
For a truly aggressive technology solutions provider, there is another business model that has not yet 
been observed in practice. Rather than selling subscription fees to agribusinesses, a technology solution provider could secure a percentage of the costs saved, increased revenues and/or increased profit. Such 
a revenue model will require the formation of an analytical business case up front in order to make the 
value proposition for shared participation in savings, revenues and/or profits. This will require establishing an agreed upon baseline or index against which the business performance of the ICT4Ag platform will be compared. Such a type of arrangement will be more of a partnership between the agribusiness and 
technology solution provider rather than a customer/vendor relationship. It could also open the door to 
regional and local agribusinesses that might not feel they have the financial resources to pay a monthly subscription fee for a confined range of functionalities. 
Type of investor: MNO
There is a very recent trend of  MNOs 
partnering with global, regional and local agribusinesses in order to roll out their service offerings in rural areas. A key value proposition is 
to be the first MNO to secure a competitive 
advantage by successfully implementing a bundled ICT4Ag solution set in partnership with an agribusiness. Metrics include: increased subscriptions, reduced churn
33 and increased 
bottom-line profitability for the mobile voice and mobile money service offerings. 
Within MNO corporate environments for any 
ICT4Ag initiative, there needs to be a roadmap that creates a clear value proposition.
34 An MNO 
that pursues a mobile agriculture initiative will seek to understand the core KPIs of  the agribusiness in order to work with them to find a budget for a mobile agriculture solution. MNOs typically will have enterprise departments that include business verticals
35 of  strategic interest to 
that MNO. These verticals might include: agriculture, bulk payments, utilities, transportation fleet management, government-
to-people payments, etc. If  an MNO chooses to 
add an agriculture vertical to their enterprise department they will usually only do so if  agriculture in that country contributes 30% or more to national GDP . Unfortunately , few 
MNOs understand agribusiness so MNOs must 
increase their investment in human capacity in agriculture in order to coordinate and collaborate better with agriculture stakeholders. In the case of  GSMA, the apex organisation for 
800+ MNOs worldwide, they partner with 
donors and foundations to fund grant mechanisms that work with MNOs to develop products and services for agriculture (as well as health, women, youth, disaster response, etc.). 61
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Vodafone is a mobile network operator with operations throughout Africa and elsewhere. Their first 
foray into agriculture was an initiative at Vodafone-Turkey. The Farmers Club CSP was started in 2009 and provides SMS text information about weather, market pricing, agronomic and general agriculture 
information to 903,000 active users in the country. The Farmers Club CSP was championed by the then CEO 
of Vodafone-Turkey who had an intimate understanding of the lives and needs of farmers from her previous role as general manager for the agriculture and food company Danone-Turkey.
Farmer Club’s content partner is TABIT, a Turkish social enterprise focusing on ICT enablement for smallholder 
farmers. It should be noted that while Farmers Club-Turkey provides freemium (i.e. free and paid) pricing for information services to farmers they do not have a sustainable revenue or cost model. Nevertheless, Vodafone-Turkey have accrued indirect benefits including reduced churn and increased brand awareness 
(GSMA, 2015). It is also important to note there has been less traction for the Farmers Club model in Eastern 
and West Africa because of lower levels of literacy than in Turkey, as well as the lower appetite of farmers to pay for services (AGRA, 2016). 
Perhaps informed by Vodafone’s experience with the Farmers Club model in Turkey and Africa, Vodafone’s 
second CSP – the CFA – did not rely on payments by farmers for its commercial viability. Instead, the intent 
was to rely on investment by agribusinesses that received improved supply chain efficiencies. 
36 https://reddsvip.com/ 
37 Ibaraki, S. (18 July 2016). Skype interview. Type of investor: Venture/social  
capital investor
Venture capital firms want to deploy a cogent 
approach for combining several ICT4Ag ventures into a single investment strategy . Their primary option for investment is to take equity in a local 
technology solution provider, thereby contributing 
to the professionalisation of  the business by participating on the board of  directors. Their sole metric is receiving an ROI. Depending on the venture capitalist they may entertain a lower 
than usual ROI if  the potential for social impact 
is great. 
World renowned ICT expert/futurist and partner 
at REDDS Venture Investments,
36 Stephen 
Ibaraki,37 considers our digital era of  hyper-
extreme connectivity as the catalyst for massively disruptive innovations. So significant is the current ‘digital quake’ that nearly 60% of  the US 
workforce will be replaced by automation. 
Component manufacturing, that has been a key element of  the modern economy , is being replaced by algorithm-based production. In developing countries, the normal path to wealth creation has 
been the provision of  cheap labour, but that is no 
longer the case. These and other massive disruptions in society and the economy will create even more extremism, and political and economic 
instability leading to ‘planetary chaos’. However, in 
about a decade, new societal, economic and political structures and dynamics will have constituted and a new normal will emerge. This overarching philosophy about the ‘digital quake’ has resulted in REDDS Ventures investing in opportunities that will be part of  the upcoming ‘new normal’. REDDS Ventures 
focuses on ICT investments globally , within 
which 20% of  their overall portfolio is focused on ICT4Ag. For their ICT4Ag investments, 70% of  their portfolio is expected to generate ROI and the remaining 30% philanthropic portfolio 
must at least break even. REDDS focuses on 
applications that can scale to any crop and therefore generate robust ROI. A promising application that is more localised in nature becomes a harder decision because it will have 
less of  an ROI potential. If  promising enough, 
though, it might be included within REDDS’ CSR/philanthropic portfolio. 
One of  REDDS Ventures’ potential investment 
targets is business contests and incubator 
initiatives. In the past decade, young African 
entrepreneurs have often focused on the technology without taking into account underlying economics and business planning. The benefit of  business contests and incubator 
initiatives, however, is that start-ups are forced to 
think about and adopt a more business-like approach. These contests and incubators, therefore, increase the rate at which REDDS 
Ventures receives business proposals and 
investment offers. To continue to improve the level of  professionalisation, which ICT4Ag technology solution providers often lack, there is a need for continued investment, whether by 62
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
financial institutions, foundations or another 
class of  investor in contests and incubators.38 39  
 
For example, the Barclays Accelerator40 provides 
a 13-week programme (in Cape Town, London, 
New York and Tel Aviv) that provides mentoring from leading entrepreneurs, access to technical expertise, networking and access to key decision-
makers within Barclays Bank. Barclays also 
provides up to US$120,000 of  debt and/or equity investment to each mentee. 
Safaricom, the MNO in Kenya that invented 
M-Pesa, started their own US$1 million venture capital Spark Fund
41 in 2014. Its objectives 
include transforming and supporting the development of  mobile ICT start-ups through capacity building and partnerships in order to 
transform the lives of  Safaricom customers. 
Spark Fund covers multiple sectors and while US$1 million is a modest sized fund, it seems their intent is to secure minor equity stakes in ICT business models that use Safaricom’s voice, 
data, information and payments infrastructure, 
and then refer them to Safaricom’s wider partnership and funding networks. Spark Fund is currently considering a framework for how to review and select investment opportunities in the 
ICT4Ag space. 
Type of investor: Financial institution
Financial institutions are embracing the potential 
of  ICTs – particularly digital data/information capture platforms – that improve their credit decision-making, as well as new digital platforms 
for distribution and repayment of  loans to 
farmers. They are equally interested in improving their service provision to existing 
38 Rutten, L. (28 July 2016). Skype interview. 
39 Asare-Kyei, D. (6 September 2016). Personal interview. 
40 http://www.barclaysaccelerator.com/#/ 
41 http://www.safaricom.co.ke/spark/ customers. Of  greatest interest, though, is the 
potential to increase their customer base and 
therefore their overall loan portfolio. Metrics 
include: cost savings, increased customers, size of  
loan portfolio and reduction of  portfolio at risk. 
According to Manyika et al., (2016) financial 
institutions can save 80–90% by shifting from 
traditional to digital accounts. By making this 
transition, financial institutions in emerging economies worldwide will expand their customer base and increase their balance sheets by US$4.2 trillion by 2025. Their options for investment can include conducting requirements analysis based on market research done by others as well as hiring and/or developing key personnel with 
agribusiness experience. 
A recent study by Accion (2015) analysed the 
adoption of  a converged, multi-functional digital 
solution set for three microfinance banks in 
India, Kenya and Serbia, concluding that other financial institutions and agribusinesses would also benefit. Financial institutions and agribusinesses are both looking to increase the use of  digital applications by field-based loan 
officers and agriculture extension agents to 
capture data on borrowers or farmer’s business activity , and then pull the data back to the main bank branch/agribusiness head office for collation and decision-making. As such, Accion’s 
lessons learned in terms of  investment, 
technology and deployment costs are comparable to agribusinesses as well. The study also found there was a requisite need for organisational change management to ensure 
management and staff buy-in.63
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Lessons learned
Investment There is a need for: 
• requirements analysis
• business process reengineering
• development of clear data collection plan
• monitoring of pilot results before scaling 
• identification of key champions
Technology There is a need to:• cater to poor connectivity
• decide where to store data
• consider security protocols
• field test devices and the operating system
• work closely with the technology solution provider
Deployment costs Capital expenses (CAPEX) include:
• the platform itself
• implementation
• infrastructure (devices, servers)
• operating expenses (OPEX) include: maintenance of the platform
• support/training to farmers and other borrowers
• connection charges
• insurance (optional)
• batteries for devices and data storage
42  http://www.umaticapital.com/ 
43  Mbowa, I. (September 2016).  Personal interview.  The experience of  Umati Capital42 in Kenya 
also echoed the need for internal change 
management.43 Launched in 2012, Umati Capital 
is a financial services company that provides working capital financing to agribusiness supply 
chains. They embed technology into agribusinesses 
to automate processes, capture data and distribute information, as well as for the distribution and repayment of  working capital loans. Their website even provides a convenient calculator that instantly 
computes Umati’s fee based on a customer’s 
expected invoice amount. Umati’s services can inform any foray by a financial institution into technology driven agriculture finance. 
Regarding internal change management, 
Umati’s first experience was with a dairy processor, but conflicting management issues within the dairy company detracted the management’s focus from making the most of  
the Umati project. In addition, Umati 
encountered resistance from dairy graders and clerks who did not welcome the transparency of  Umati’s platform which would prevent them from taking a cut of  dairy farmers’ profits. In 
Tanzania, a Vodafone (2015) dairy case study 
revealed that platform transparency eliminated fraud that had been causing losses of  20% of  daily milk deliveries to the processor. For Umati’s dairy processor, there was also significant need to train the graders and clerks on the Android platform. This was a hard lesson learned for Umati because they had not anticipated the need for training so relied on 
their platform developers/designers who were ill 
equipped to be trainers. Further, Umati imagined that training was only needed once at initial implementation and not on an ongoing basis to ensure behaviour change. 
With the benefit of  these lessons, Umati’s next 
implementation was markedly more successful. Their second client, a Kenyan nut processor, had internal champions in the form of  the CEO as 
well as the COO due to their close analysis of  
costs, savings and increased revenues. Internal resistance from graders and clerks was responded to and managed by the CEO and COO. This committed management buy-in translated to 
staff buy-in as well as extensive staff training 
when management periodically convened personnel nationwide in locations throughout Kenya. Aside from the benefits that accrued to the farmer as a result of  the platform’s 
transparency , the nut processing company was 
able to streamline its supply chain mitigate the potential of  customer fraud. 64
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Areas of investment
Conclusion
44  Asare-Kyei, D. (6 September 2016). Personal interview.ICT is truly revolutionary in nature because there 
is no problem for which a technical solution cannot 
be designed. Importantly , according to Dr Daniel Asare-Kyei, CEO of  Insyt.co and former managing director of  Esoko, the technology is “only 5% of  the 
solution (while) 95% is the business process, 
deployment process and team composition.”
44 
The time is now for investment in ICT4Ag. Mobile phone penetration rates are high and rising. Smartphones, that provide a channel for the internet, are also rapidly entering the African marketplace. Cellular coverage throughout Africa is 
90% and growing. Meanwhile, multiple other 
technologies reliant on the phone and/or internet  – 
such as IoT/sensors, big data analytics (finance, supply chain, traceability , etc.), precision agriculture, 
cloud computing, blockchain decentralised ledger 
technology , machine-to-machine learning and more – have already emerged and are rapidly expanding. 
The future of  ICT4Ag should be bundled 
functionalities and be paid for primarily by 
agribusinesses. It must be designed and delivered by way of  a CSP that aggregates the skills and expertise of  selected partners, all of  whom agree upon a common vision and plan of  execution. Agribusinesses and MNOs must be aggressive 
about substantially investing in the hiring and/or 
development of  human capacity . Meanwhile, research as well as training design and delivery are the key investment priorities for donors and foundations. This aligns with their core objective 
of  understanding beneficiaries (research) and 
developing (training) content that can be scaled to other value chains and countries. The agribusinesses, MNOs, technology service providers, financial institutions, donors/
foundations, venture capital investors and farmers 
that embrace a CSP partnership now, to pursue what ICT can do, will secure the advantage. 
The need for CSPs to successfully deliver ICT4Ag 
solutions seems to be a foregone conclusion, however a lack of  management and staff buy-in, 
as well as requisite analyses of  the modelling and design of  the underlying business case and value 
proposition for each partner, reveals that the 
importance of  managing these partnerships has not yet been recognised. There are three steps of  bespoke investment that are required to overcome these challenges: pre-project research/feasibility study/analysis; formation of  a CSP; and project execution of  the ICT4Ag solution vis-à-vis  
awareness, education and training. Within each of  these areas, there must be investment and commitment towards the requisite levels of  internal 
change management amongst all CSP partners.
Regarding the ICT4Ag solution, it is no longer 
about a single application but is, instead, about a 
bundled set of  applications that provide an 
approach that must be integrated into the core business of  each partner, including operations, training, client education, accounting, IT , marketing and human resources. In addition to 
these internal challenges there are also external 
steps related to bundled ICT4Ag business models that need to be implemented, vis-à-vis  business case 
and value proposition analysis for CSPs, awareness raising, education and training. Given these internal change management and business model challenges 
a broader spectrum of  CSP-sponsored activities 
that are less about the technology and more about business process reengineering must be pursued. 
While ICT4Ag CSPs will be driven by the 
agribusiness, it is clear that farmer acceptance 
and trust in the technology is paramount for the scalability and viability of  the business model. As stated by Gates (2016), “The power of  a phone in every pocket is turning out to be extremely 
disruptive in exciting ways and the poor finally 
have a chance to use technology in ways that solve the real problems they face in their lives.” The voice of  the farmer can now be heard individually or in the aggregate and if  they don’t feel listened to, the 
interests of  all the CSP partners will be in jeopardy!   
Acknowledgement
Chapter four has had the benefit of  review and 
iteration by Kevin Wilkins, Component Lead for  
coffee and cocoa for ÉLAN RDC in the Democratic Republic of  Congo. REFERENCES 
65
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?References 
Accion (September 2015). Digital Field 
Applications: Case Studies
Aker, J., et al. (July 2015). Payment mechanisms 
and anti-poverty programs: Evidence from a 
mobile money cash transfer experiment in 
Niger, CGD workpaper number 268. 
Accion (September 2015). Digital Field 
Applications: Case Study . http://www.accion.org/sites/default/files/consolidated_dfa_study .pdf  
Babcock, L., Statham, C., Junge, N. (August 
2016). Performance Evaluation of  the USAID/Malawi Feed the Future Mobile Money Project. USAID/Mendez, England & Associates. 
Babcock, L. (2015a). Mobile Payments: How 
Digital Finance is Transforming Agriculture. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen. 
Babcock, L. (2015c). Why a Common Platform 
is within Reach: Mobile finance and the emergence of  a comprehensive ICT4D mHub platform. NextBillion blog. 
Babcock, L. (2015b). The Blockchain and 
Mobile Money for Agriculture in Developing Countries. Digital Currency Council blog. 
Bell, S. (2006). Lean Enterprise Systems: Using 
IT for Continuous Improvement. A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication.
Blok, V ., Sjauw-Koen-Fa, A., Omta, O. (2013). 
Effective Stakeholder Involvement at the 
Base of  the Pyramid. International Food and 
Agribusiness Management Review, Volume 
16, Special Issue A. 
Brett, C. (August 2016). Delivering better 
livelihoods for smallholder farmers. Eco-
Business blog. 
Brune, L., Gin, X., Goldberg, J., Yang, D. (2016). 
Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field 
Experimental Evidence from Malawi. 
Economic Development and Cultural 
Change, University of  Chicago Press. CGAP/Intermedia (2015). Financial Inclusion 
Insights (FII) Survey: Ghana and Rwanda.
Crosby , P . (1980). Quality if  Free. New York: 
Penguin Books
CTA (2016). Lessons for Sustainability: Failing to 
Scale ICT4Ag-enabled Services. 
Dahlberg (nd). Inflection Point: Unlocking 
Growth in the era of  farmer finance. 
Deng, A. (5 August 2015). To Really Help the 
Global Poor, Create Technology they’ll Pay for. Harvard Business Review. 
Dentoni, D., Bitzer, V ., Pascucci, S. (April 2016). 
Cross-Sector Partnerships and the Co-
Creation of  Dynamic Capabilities for 
Stakeholder Orientation. Journal of  Business Ethics, Volume 135, Issue 1. 
Dentoni, D., Hospes, O., Ross, B. (2012). 
Managing Wicked Problems in Agribusiness: The Role of  Multi-Stakeholder Engagements in Value Creation. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review, Volume 15, Special Issue B. 
Dentoni, D., Peterson, C. (2011). Multi-
Stakeholder Sustainability Alliances in Agri-Food Chains: A Framework for Multi-Disciplinary Research. International Food 
and Agribusiness Management Review, 
Volume 14, Issue 5. 
The Economist (2013). Redefining the Digital 
Divide. Commissioned by Huawei. 
The Economist (28 February 2015). Planet of  
the Phones. 
Ericsson (June 2016). Ericsson Mobility Report: 
On the Pulse of  the Networked Society . 
Evans, D., Pirchio, A. (March 2015). An 
Empirical Examination of  Why Mobile Money Schemes Ignite in Some Developing Countries but Flouder in Most. University of  Chicago Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & 
Economics Research Paper No. 723.REFERENCES 
66
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?FAO, CTA, ITU, e-Agriculture (September 2015). 
Towards National e-Agriculture Strategies. 
Gates, B. (15 February 2016). The Secret 
Decoder Ring: How Cell Phones Let 
Farmers, Governments and Markets Talk to Each Other. Foreign Affairs, African Farmers in the Digital Age special edition. 
GIC Directors (2015). GIC 2020 Skills 
Assessment. International Professional Practice Partnership: Transforming the IT Professional Practice. 
GSMA (June 2015). Vodafone Turkey Farmers 
Club: Case Study .
Hildebrand, N., Nyarko, Y ., Roagnoli, G., 
Soldani, E. (6 July 2015). Price Information, Inter-Village Networks, and “Bargaining 
Spillovers”: Experimental Evidence from 
Ghana. New York University , NYU Abu Dhabi and Center for Technology and Economic Development. 
Hystra (2011). Leveraging Information and 
Communication Technology for the Base of  the Pyramid: Innovative business models in education, health, agriculture and financial services. Joint report with TNO.
Ibaraki, S. (26 November 2015). The next wave 
of  disruption: Super-smart cities 2010. ITWorld Canada blog. 
Initiative for Smallholder Finance (February 
2015). Case study: ROI from TechnoServes Coffee Initiative, Briefing 09. 
Kleinbaum, D. (15 November 2015). Why 
NGO’s are Switching to Mobile Money . 
Beyonic LinkedIn Pulse blog.
London, T . (2016). The Base of  the Pyramid 
Promise: Building Businesses with Impact 
and Scale. Stanford University Press.
London, T . (2009). Making Better Investments at 
the Base of  the Pyramid. Harvard Business Review. 
Manyika, J., Lund, S., Singer, M., White, O., 
Berry , C. (September 2016). How digital finance could boost growth in emerging economies. McKinsey Global Institute. Manyika, J., Chui, M., Bisson, P ., Woetzel, J., 
Dobbs, R., Bughin, J., Aharon, D. (June 
2015). The Internet of  Things: Mapping the 
Value Beyond the Hype. McKinsey Global 
Institute. 
Matich, L. (August 2016). Highlights from the 
2016 Mobile Money Leadership Forum in 
Tanzania. GSMA blog. 
Mayaki, I. (11 May 2016). 3 way to transform 
agriculture in Africa. World Economic Forum 
blog. 
Moceviciute, E., Babcock, L. (2016). USAID/
Vodafone Case Studies. TechnoServe.
Nakasone, E. (2013). The Role of  Price 
Information in Agriculture Markets: Experimental Evidence from Rural Peru. 
Selected paper prepared for presentation at 
the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association’s 2013 AAEA & CAES Joint Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, August 4-6, 2013.
Pariente, P ., Canteneur, P ., Faussat, A. (2016). 
AGTech: Will technology feed and save us. L’Ateier BNP Paribas. 
Peterson, C. (2013). Fundamental Principles of  
Managing Multi-Stakeholder Alliances. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review, Volume 16, Special Issue A. 
Polanco-Ceballos, R. (4 December 2015). Cost 
of  Cash Payments for Retailers, LinkedIn Pulse blog. 
Pureswaran, V ., Brody , P . (2015). Device 
democracy: Saving the future of  the Internet of  Things. IBM Institute for Business Value. 
Pye-Smith, C. (2014). ICTs & Agriculture, CTA.
Sarni, W ., Mariani, J., Kaji, J. (January 2016). 
From dirt to data: The second green 
revolution and the Internet of  Things. Deloitte Review, Issue 18.
Shrier, D., Canale, G., Pentland, A. (2016). 
Mobile Money & Payments: Technology Trends. Connection Science and Engineering. Massachusetts Institute of  Technology . REFERENCES 
67
Why Invest in ICTs for Agriculture?Subervie, J. (30 November – 2 December 2011). 
Evaluation of  the Impact of  a Ghanian 
mobile based MIS on the first few users using 
a quasi-experimental design. French National 
Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA). 
Sudarkasa, M. (2012). Inclusive Business 
Finance: A Handbook on Mobilizing Finance 
and Investment for MSMEs in Africa. UNDP 
African Facility for Inclusive Markets. 
Svennson, J., Yanagizawa, D. (2009). Getting 
Prices Right: The Impact of  the Market Information Service in Uganda. Journal of  European Economic Association, Volume 7, Issue 2-3. 
TechnoServe, Vodafone & USAID (n.d.). 
Technology Adoption and Change Management Guide for Agribusinesses: 
Facilitators Guide. 
Tricarico, D. (October 2015). Mobile financial 
services for smallholder farmers on the table 
at G20. GSMA blog. 
USAID/Fintrac (October 2014). A Guide to 
Optimizing Partnerships with the Private Sector for Smallholder Impact. Feed the Future, Partnering for Innovation.Valero, J. (7 June 2016). Mastercard international 
chief: Brexit wouldn’t be a significant change 
for us. EurActive.com blog.
Valero, J. (21 January 2016). Bank Chief: The 
end of  cash could happen within a decade. 
EuroActive.com blog.
Vodafone/Accenture (September 2011). 
Connected Agriculture. 
Vodafone/Accenture (May 2015). Connected 
Farming in India: How mobile can support farmers’ livelihoods.
Vota, W . (May 2016). How can we Create an 
Integrated ICTforAg Sensor Ecosystem. ICTworks blog.
Waruingi, J., Muriithi, E. (September 2016). 
How to Grow and Sustain the Digital Harvest: Deep dive into Business Models of  15 ICT4Ag Solution Providers across Ghana, Kenya and Tanzania. AGRA/Mastercard Foundation publication.CONTACT US
CTAPO Box 3806700 AJ WageningenThe Netherlands
Tel: +31 317 467100
Fax: +31 317 460067Email: cta@cta.int
www.facebook.com/CTApage
@CTAflashThe Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA) is a joint international institution of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States and the European Union 
(EU). CTA operates under the framework of the Cotonou 
Agreement and is funded by the EU.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON CTA, VISIT WWW.CTA.INT
